Through professional work with children of different ages in daycare, babysitting and summer camp settings, it appears that male children are more likely to engage in physically interactive group play. At first glance, it appears that male children are more physical in their types of play, tending to push, shove, touch each other or invade one another's personal space. Psychologists have paid close attention to the different play styles of male and female children in recent years. Scott and Panksepp (2003) looked specifically at the occurrence of rough and tumble play among 3 to 6 year olds. Their findings show a higher frequency of physically interactive play among their male subjects in free play environments, but did not find any significant gender differences in controlled environments. Manwell and Mengert (1934) found a higher frequency of group play among 3 year olds than with 2 year olds, and found boys more likely to engage in physical play than girls. Colwell and Lindsey (2005) analyzed differences in child play behavior with regard to the gender of play partners. Their findings also confirmed the higher incidence of physical play among male children, and showed that boys who engaged in physical play with same-sex children were more liked by peers than boys who engaged in physical play with opposite-sex children. These research findings all suggest that male children are more likely to physically interact in a group play setting than females, and that they are more likely to interact with other boys in this style of play. These studies are significant because they show a higher tendency of males to exhibit group play behavior and physically interactive play, such as rough and tumble play, and both of these factors are considered with the present study's focus on physically interactive group play.
In the present work we evaluated physically interactive group play at a University-based Children's Center in the Midwestern United States. Our research focused on observing the presence of physical group play in male and female subjects. We proposed that male children would show a higher frequency of engaging in physically interactive group play than female children.
The sample consisted of 20 children, aged 3-6 years old. There were 14 male and 6 female students. Five males were in the 5-6 year old classroom, 9 males were in the 3-4 year old classrooms and all 6 females were in the 3-4 year old classrooms. Each researcher randomly selected five children to observe upon arriving at his/her assigned classroom for observation at the center. The research team was unable to obtain background information on the children regarding racial identity, socioeconomic background, or personal or family history. The children belonged to three different classrooms at the Children's Center, one classroom for 5-6 year olds, and two classrooms for 3-4 year olds. The children did not receive any sort of compensation for their participation because they were not directly informed of the observation. The Children's Center informs the parents of the research and observations performed at the Center and the parents sign consent forms allowing for the observation of their children. By means of the consent forms that are kept on file at the center, the researchers received indirect parental consent to observe the children. The study did not present the children with any potential harm or risk. The center follows a philosophy that helps them care for the developmental needs of each child, while creating a fun and nurturing play environment for all. In this experiment, the researchers had no control over the classroom environments, but the different classrooms appeared to have similar quantities and styles of toys and play areas for the children to interact, learn and have fun.
Three investigators observed the children in two classrooms through one-way mirrors in an observation room. The investigators had to walk through the classroom to enter the observation room, allowing for a possibility of being seen by the subjects in one of the classrooms. The subjects did not seem to take any interest more than a quick glance. The researcher in the fourth classroom entered the classroom and sat quietly on a chair near the doorway, in full view of the children. Three of the investigators were non-participant concealed observers, and the fourth investigator was a non-participant non-concealed observer. The children were all observed during an assigned period of "free play" in the classroom. The four investigators each observed five children at one time, for a period of thirty minutes. Each investigator had a watch with a second hand to provide an accurate measure of time for the procedure. The children were recorded as showing a presence or absence of physically interactive group play every 30 seconds for 30 minutes, providing 60 items of data per child.
We operationalized physical play as any sort of physical interaction between the subject and any of the other children in the room, with physical interaction including hugging, pushing, touching the other child while working together and touching the same toy at the same time. For example, two male subjects were coded as displaying physically interactive group play when they were standing together next to a large tray of putty and intertwined their arms as they laughed and pressed their hands into the putty. We did not code for physical interaction between the subject and the adults teachers in the room. The researchers recorded these findings using a number one to represent presence and a number zero to represent absence on a table with 60 increments for observations every 30 seconds over a 30-minute period. Each researcher observed five children over a 30-minute period.
The inter-rater reliability was established between the four observers immediately before the observations began. The researchers all observed one randomly selected child, all individually coding for the presence or absence of physically interactive group play every 30 seconds for five minutes. Inter-rater reliability was established with a 90% rate of reliability. Having demonstrated an overall understanding of the team's operational definition of physical play, the researchers then went on to make their individual observations of different children.
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics used to analyze the data and Table 2 presents the raw scores of the observations of the children in physically interactive group play. Our hypothesis predicted higher frequencies of group play for the male subjects than for the female subjects. Table 2 shows the range of the scores, with some subjects showing no instances of physically interactive group play (male subjects 1, 2, 3 and 7) while some male and female subjects exhibited much higher frequencies (male subject 14, female subjects 18, 19, 29). The ranges for both gender groups are similar, 38 for the male subjects (0-38), and 36 for the females (10-46). Table 1 displays the variance for each gender group, 113.67 for males with a standard deviation of 10.66, and variance of 191.07 and standard deviation of 13.82 for females. A small variance indicates that the scores all fall close to the mean, and the variances of 113.67 and 191.07 are not very small numbers, thus they do not suggest that the scores all fall close to the mean. The standard deviation scores, 10.66 for males and 13.82 for females suggest that the scores fall in a wide range around the median.
Table 1 presents the frequency and central tendency for each gender's data. For males, the overall frequency was 156 instances of physically interactive group play out of 840 observations, 18.57%, and females were recorded with 158 instances out of a possible 360 observations, 43.89%. Our hypothesis predicted a higher frequency of group play among male subjects than females, but the raw scores show a higher frequency of group play among females than males. The male mean was 11.14, mode of 0 and median of 10. The male subjects had a mode of 0 because 4 of the 14 subjects were not recorded as displaying any instances of physically interactive group play. The female mean was 26.3, mode was not determined and median of 28. The data does not display a mode for the females owing to the small number of subjects (6) and that none of the scores repeated. Looking at Figure 1, it is apparent that the mean observed interactions for the female subjects is more than twice the mean observed interactions for the male subjects. These results show that the female subjects showed a higher tendency to display instances of physically interactive group play, as noted by the greater mean and median than those of the male subjects. These results fail to support our research hypothesis that males would show a higher tendency of physical group play, and as analyzed by the different forms of descriptive statistics, the results actually appear to refute our hypothesis.
The purpose of this study was to examine the differences in frequencies of physically interactive group play of 3-6 year old male and female children enrolled at a research-oriented preschool. We proposed that through observation of these children during free play in their classrooms, we would observe a higher frequency of physically interactive group play among the male subjects that the females. The findings of this study clearly did not support our hypothesis, showing that female children showed higher average rates of physical play than males. These findings do not necessarily discredit the findings of the previous research studies used as background research, due to the many limitations of this study.
Our results showed a higher frequency of physically interactive group play among females, contrary to the findings of Scott and Panksepp (2003) which showed a higher frequency of physical play among males. Our research assessed the frequencies of physical group play though, while Scott and Panksepp (2003) looked only at the occurrence of rough and tumble play, which may attribute to the differences in our findings. While our research did not record for rough and tumble play specifically, it was included in the coding of physical play, allowing for the possibility of rough and tumble play to be coded along with pro-social and gentle physical group play. Our results do not support the findings from the research by Manwell and Mengert (1934) that boys are more likely to exhibit group play behaviors. Colwell and Lindsey (2005) showed higher instances of group play among male children, which is not supported by the findings of our research, but this study also focused on the gender of play partners, a variable that was not coded for in this observation study.
The external validity of this study was limited by the small sample size (n = 20) and the lack of random assignment of the subjects. The subjects in the sample all attended the same preschool program with a play-based and research oriented philosophy in a middle-upper class university town in the Midwestern United States. Future studies should try to incorporate larger sample sizes from different populations to improve upon the external validity of the study.
It was not known how long the children had been attending the preschool, how long they had been in the classroom with their peers. It is entirely possible that some of the subjects had been in the same classrooms together for different periods of time, allowing them to become more familiar with each other and less inhibited to engage in physically active group play with one another. While the results of the present study do not support the research hypothesis, they provide the background for further research into the different factors that may affect levels of familiarity that allow children to comfortably engage in physically interactive group play. Future studies should identify the levels of familiarity between the different subjects, by identifying how long they have known each other and if they have any social interactions outside of the classroom. Other issues to consider are cultural background, an analysis of family behaviors; whether they encourage or discourage physical play at home, and a look at different gender interactions. These studies could identify different factors that affect children's comfort and likelihood of engaging with peers in a physically interactive style.
As a classroom-based observation, the researchers were unable to manipulate the setting, such as the number or gender of the children, the objects found in the classroom or the way the teachers interacted with the children. The different classrooms and different teachers are confounding variables that may have contributed to the children's different behaviors. Perhaps one classroom has more group-play style toys, encouraging the children to work together more and therefore providing the opportunity for more physical play, where another classroom has more books and art supplies, providing opportunities for solitary play. The observations took place during a brief time slot assigned by the preschool, during the free play period at the beginning of the day while the children were arriving. During the observation, different children were arriving to the classroom, and many children appeared to be talking animatedly to the teacher, discussing what had happened since their last class together. Because of the early hour of the observation, the children may not have been behaving in the same way that they would at a later hour, or in a free play session in a different setting outside of the classroom, such as the playround. This sample consisted of children aged 3-6 who come from different family backgrounds. Perhaps the children experience sadness or mental anguish at their parents departure and are less likely to engage in intimate, physical play with peers in the very beginning of the day, but they may become more comfortable as the day goes on and show higher levels of physical play. Future studies should incorporate time of day and location into the research design to try to explain these confounding variables.
While the findings of this study failed to support the research hypothesis, they still pave the way for future research ideas. Although there exists a plethora of research findings that show male children are more inclined to physically interactive group play, the present study found females were actually more likely to engage in physical play. Future research should address the confounding subject variables, such as the subject's family background and culture, length of time children have known each other and time of day. In addition, the research design should accommodate for different situational variables, identifying what style of toys are found in the environment, using both indoor and outdoor environments, and noting the presence or absence of adult figures.

Creativity has been described as "one of the most enigmatic subjects in cognitive psychology" (Kim, Cramond, & Bandalos, 2006). It is difficult to define and tricky to measure, but seemingly easy to recognize (Amabile, 1982). It may also have a host of benefits for those who posses it; previous research has suggested that creative interventions can have a significant impact in many different areas, from increasing life satisfaction and sense of purpose in the elderly, to supporting teacher effectiveness (Davidovitch & Milgram, 2006; Krawczynsi & Olszewski, 2000; Cook, 1998; Dawson & Baller, 1972).
Though many today would agree that creativity is significant and that it should be nurtured, not many would be able to agree on exactly what creativity is or how to go about supporting its development. The nature of creativity is highly subjective, and there is little agreement among researchers as to a specific definition (Johnson & Carruthers, 2006). Some define creativity simply as "the ability to produce work which is both novel and appropriate" (Lubart, 1994). Others focus on the making of connections between previously unrelated concepts (Mednick, 1964). Still others focus on the evaluation of creative products, defining a creative product as something which is judged to be "creative" by people who are knowledgeable in the field (Amabile, 1979; Amabile, 1982a; Amabile, 1982b; Amabile, 1983; Amabile & Gitomer, 1984)
Assessment is therefore difficult; different tasks are developed according to different conceptions of creativity, and research projects will typically use only one type of measure (Johnson & Carruthers, 2006; Kim, Cramond, & Bandalos, 2006). Because these measures test different abilities, it is difficult to make connections between separate studies in order to draw conclusions about what types of creative processes might relate to realistic creative output and lifetime achievement.
Some of the oldest conceptions of creativity are based on the cognitive processes thought to be necessary for creativity to be present. Within this process based approach, two types of thinking are stressed: convergent thinking, which is the ability to combine different pieces of information based on the elements they have in common; and divergent thinking, which is the ability to create many different ideas based on a single topic.
Mednick, one of the earliest proponents of convergent thinking as an indicator of creativity, defined creative thinking as: "forming of associative elements into new combinations which either meet specified requirements or are in some way useful" (Mednick, 1964). He therefore based many of his assessments on verbal association tasks, such as the Remote Associates Task in which participants are provided with a grouping of three seemingly unrelated words and asked to think of a fourth word which links the previous three; and a response task, in which participants are provided with a single word and asked to think of as many words that are associated with the original word as possible (Houston & Mednick, 1963; Mednick, Mednick, & Jung 1964).
This type of thinking indicates an ability to focus on correct responses while disregarding irrelevant responses in order to come to a correct answer (White & Shah, 2006). This focus and concentration on important aspects of a problem may be important in order to produce a creative piece of work (Sosik, Kahai, & Avolio, 1999). However, the same focus that allows a person to disregard irrelevant information may also prevent them from considering "off the wall" solutions that are often thought of as being creative (White & Shah, 2006).
Divergent thinking, on the other hand, encourages the individual to think of as many ideas as possible -- even if they seem odd or unworkable at first glance. Guilford (1950) suggests that an important factor in creativity is fluency, which is the quantity of creative production. Although rapid and prolific production alone will not guarantee a creative final product, if two people are producing the same quality of work, and one of those people is able to produce more, that person will be more likely to come up with a significantly creative idea (Guilford, 1950). Testing of divergent thinking often involves asking the participant to engage in brainstorming activities, such as responding to the prompt: "What are some possible uses for a paperclip" (Plucker & Runco, 1998). While at first responses will usually be somewhat mundane ("hold paper together"), after these typical responses are exhausted something original might come to mind ("arrange clips to spell 'tip' and leave at a restaurant when the service has been poor").
While Guilford argues that more production will simply lead to a greater likelihood of a creative response, one danger of the divergent thinking conception of creativity is that often, quality is ignored in favor of quantity (Cropley, 2006; Guilford, 1950). While it is possible for a person to happen upon a creative solution through divergent thinking alone, it is more likely that some convergent thinking will be necessary in order to produce an idea that is accurate and meaningful (Cropley, 2006).
Assessment using both of the previous models of creativity is based on the process that results in a creative product. However, neither model focuses much on any realistic examples of creativity. While understanding the cognitive processes that drive creativity can aid researchers who are searching for ways to mold creative young minds, often these process assessments of creativity suffer from lack of a direct link to a creative product (Amabile, 1982b).
Self-report of previous creative achievement is one way of assessing creativity through actual accomplishments. Carson, Higgins, & Peterson (2003) suggests that because certain processes associated with creativity -- such as divergent thinking -- are also present at a higher than average level in some disordered populations who do not tend to engage in creative production, these processes may not be enough by themselves to identify creative individuals. Therefore, in order to determine which people are truly creative achievers they suggest gathering information about their lifetime accomplishments.
Carson, Peterson, & Higgins (2005) conducted several experiments designed to test their Creativity Achievement Questionnaire (CAQ). This questionnaire was developed in order to assess creativity on the basis of past creative accomplishments (Carson, Peterson, & Higgins, 2005). They were able to show that the CAQ was a good predictor of creative ability and future creative behavior, and that the CAQ correlated with personality traits associated with highly creative individuals, and with divergent thinking abilities.
While this type of questionnaire is valuable for its ability to identify creative individuals, it is difficult to use the results in order to determine what creates, drives, and nurtures creativity. Scoring is objective and leaves little room for interpretation. Amabile (1982b) suggests that a definition of creativity that focuses on environment and motivation is necessary in order to avoid the "translation problem" that many other assessment techniques face. Amabile does not attempt to quantify creativity using mathematical formulas and detailed coding, rather she admits that her scoring techniques are subjective, but asserts that they are still reliable.
In Amabile (1979) 95 undergraduates at Stanford University were asked to create a collage with the theme of "silliness" for an experiment on different moods. As a part of 8 separate experimental conditions, subjects were told that their work would or would not be evaluated, and then were either given no specific instruction on how to complete the collage, instructions relating to technical goodness, or instructions relating to creativity. In the "instructions" conditions, subjects were further divided into groups that either received very specific instructions or broad general instructions.
15 judges with prior art experience were asked to rate the collages on 16 different artistic categories, one of which was "creativity", which they received brief descriptions of before judging. The judges did not work together and were not given any special training before rating the collages. Reliability for the dimension of creativity was .79, demonstrating that it is possible for judges to recognize and rate creativity using subjective criteria for realistic products.
This method of assessing realistic creativity is very useful in studies of motivation and environment, but is weak in the area of defining personal characteristics that a creative person might possess. Like the other methods of assessing creativity, it is limited in scope and seems to be missing a part of the equation.
Though many methods of measures of creativity have been identified, because of the conceptual differences noted above, it is unclear how these measures may be related to each other. Do laboratory tasks such as the Remote Associates and the Unusual Uses predict real life creativity? How do laboratory tasks that attempt to mimic real life creative production relate to traditional measures of creative processes?
Previous theories have suggested that both convergent and divergent thinking may be important for creative production (Cropley, 2006; Finke, 1996). In Finke's model of "creative realism," the creative process begins with an "exploratory phase" in which divergent thinking plays a primary role, and then moves into a "generative phase" that involves a greater deal of convergent thinking (Finke, 1996). This type of model would result in creative inventions that were both spontaneous and practical (Finke, 1996).
In the present study we seek to combine several of the traditional methods of assessment in order to create a more complete picture of the factors of each that contribute to creativity. We tested a large group of undergraduates using several convergent thinking, divergent thinking, realistic product, and self-report measures of creativity. We predicted that high scores on the measures of divergent thinking would have a positive relationship with higher scores on realistic creative products and on the self-report measure of creative accomplishment. We further hypothesized that high scores on measures of convergent thinking would also be related to high scores on realistic creative products and the self-report measure of creative accomplishment.
55 college students from the Introductory Psychology Subject Pool of a large, Midwestern university were included in this study. One student did not complete the study; therefore the final sample size was 54. Of these, there were a total of 31 males and 23 females. Participants were between the ages of 18 and 22 (mean = 19.17) and were from ethnicities which represented the demographics of the university.
Students participated in the study in groups ranging from a single student to 30 students at a time. All measures were included in a booklet provided at the beginning of the session, and were completed with a pen or pencil. The tasks were administered and timed by the principal investigator, and the entire session lasted approximately 1 hour. Before beginning, students were asked to read and sign a consent form detailing their rights as subjects, and were given background information about the study by the principal investigator.
After signing the consent form, participants completed eight measures: the Hasher Inhibition Task, a Haiku Task, the Remote Associates Task, the Unusual Uses Task, a Children's Adapted Remote Associates Task, a Circles Task, the Creativity Achievement Questionnaire, and a General Information Questionnaire. Following completion of the General Information Questionnaire, students were given a debriefing form and thanked for their contribution to the study. Participants received 1 credit of research for their Introductory Psychology class.
The first task administered to the participants was adapted from a reading task developed to test ability to ignore distracting information (Connelly, S.L., Hasher, L., & Zacks, R.T., 1991). Participants were asked to read 8 short stories while ignoring irrelevant stimuli present within the stories. In 4 of the stories the irrelevant stimuli consisted of italicized words that did not relate to the story, while in the other 4 control stories, the irrelevant stimuli was a row of italicized x's.
The stories were presented to each participant, individually, on a sheet of unlined paper. Participants were able to read silently, at their own pace. After every person in the group finished reading, 4 comprehension questions were asked in multiple choice format. The questions for the irrelevant word stories each had two unrelated answers, a foil answer relating to the irrelevant words which were supposed to be ignored and the correct answer. The questions for the irrelevant x's stories each had three unrelated answers and the correct answer. Participants were scored based on the number of correct answers in the extra word stories versus the number of correct answers in the control stories. A higher score indicated a higher level of inhibition.
A haiku is a structured poem that is written in 3 lines. The first line contains 5 syllables, the second line contains 7 syllables, and the third line contains 5 syllables. This type of task is thought to represent realistic creativity (Amabile, 1983). Participants were given 3 minutes to create an original haiku about "summer". The creativity of the poems was scored from 0-2 in the categories of: Metaphor Imagery, Form, Movement, and Rhythm, for a possible score between 0 and 10. For example, in the category of "metaphor", a poem was given a score of "0" if no metaphors were present, "1" if it contained a simple metaphor (no depth) or a simile, and a "2" if it contained a profound metaphor with depth and quality which developed through the poem. A higher score in each category represents a greater mastery of that category. A higher total score indicates a higher level of creativity.
The Remote Associates task (RAT) is a measure of convergent thinking abilities (Mednick, 1962). Participants were presented with 46 word trios and were given 7 minutes to complete the trios with a fourth word that could be related to the previous three. An example of this is the trio "call, pay, line" in which all of the words can be related to the fourth word "phone". It is thought that the ability to mentally screen irrelevant answers in order to produce a single correct answer is a necessary skill for the RAT, and that this skill reflects convergent thinking abilities. A greater number of correct responses was associated with a higher level of convergent thinking.
The Children's Remote Associates Task (CRAT) is a measure of convergent thinking abilities which has been adapted from the original Remote Associates task (Mednick, 1962) and the Mattel children's game Tribond Jr. for children at an upper elementary school level. Participants were presented with 57 word trios and given 7 minutes to complete the trios with a fourth word that could be related to the previous three. An example of this is the trio "band, first, lemon" in which all of the words can be related to the fourth word "aid". It is thought that the ability to complete this task is related to the ability to complete the original Remote Associates task. A greater number of correct responses was associated with a higher level of convergent thinking.
The Unusual Uses task is a measure of divergent thinking abilities (Guilford, 1950). Participants were given 2 minutes each to think of as many uses as possible for a brick, and another 2 minutes to think of possible uses for a bucket. Answers were scored on the criteria of Fluency (number of unique answers), Flexibility (number of unique categories and number of categorical shifts between answers), and Originality (uniqueness of the response in relation to the sample of responses). Higher scores in each of the three scoring areas are associated with higher levels of divergent thinking.
The circles task is a measure of divergent thinking adapted from the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking (Torrance, 1974). Participants were given 7 minutes to create designs using 16 blank circles. Answers were scored on the criteria of Fluency (number of unique answers), Flexibility (number of unique categories and number of categorical shifts between answers), and Originality (uniqueness of the response in relation to the sample of responses). A higher score on the circles task indicates a higher level of divergent thinking.
The Creativity Achievement Questionnaire (Carsons, Higgins, & Peterson, 2001) was designed to rate the level of creative accomplishment of the respondent. This task was not timed. Participants were asked to check each statement that applied to them in each of 7 different creative categories. Statements such as "I do not have any training or experience in this field" were scored as a 0, whereas statements such as "My work has been reviewed in a national publication" were scored as a 7. Total scores for each category were created by adding the score (0-7) of each checked statement for that category, then multiplying the number of times the respondent had achieved the top level in that category by 7 and adding that to the original score. A higher score indicates a higher level of creative achievement.
The last item administered was a General Information Questionnaire. This task was not timed. This questionnaire was designed to provide background information on each of the participants. Subjects were asked to provide their age, their academic major(s)/minor(s), and current ADD/ADHD/learning disability status. They were also asked to check off interests and hobbies from a provided list, and to write down any other hobbies not listed.
The first hypothesis predicted that higher scores on the divergent thinking tasks would correlate with higher scores on the measure of realistic creativity and of self-report measures of creative achievement. To test this hypothesis, we ran a correlational analysis on the Unusual Uses task, the circles task, the haiku task, and the Creativity Achievement Questionnaire (CAQ). The results of the analysis are summarized in Table 1. We found that our prediction was partially supported.
As shown in Table 1, no significant relationship was found between the fluency sub-scores and the flexibility sub-scores on the haiku task. Participants who provided more answers, or demonstrated more categorical shifts, on divergent thinking tasks did not tend to score higher on the task of realistic creativity. This did not support our hypothesis. Table 1 also shows that flexibility was not significantly related to self-report of previous achievement, which did not support our hypothesis.
There were mixed results on the relationship between fluency and previous achievements. Table 1 shows that there was a significant relationship between fluency on the Unusual Uses task and the CAQ, but there was no significant relationship between fluency on the circles task and the CAQ. These results are inconclusive and do not support our hypothesis.
However, there was a significant relationship between the originality sub-score and the haiku task. Originality on the Unusual Uses task was significantly related to the haiku task, r = .303, p = .034. There was also a significant relationship between originality on the circles task and the haiku task, r = .333, p = .015. Participants who exhibited a higher level of originality on divergent thinking tasks tended to score higher on the realistic assessment of creativity. These results lend support to our hypothesis.
There was also a significant relationship between the originality sub-score and reports of previous creative achievements. The originality sub-score on the Unusual Uses task was positively correlated with the CAQ, r = .534, p = .000. The originality sub-score on the circles task was also positively correlated with the CAQ, r = .309, p = .024. A higher level of originality on divergent thinking tasks was associated with greater previous creative accomplishments. This provides support for our hypothesis.
In order to control for the effects of other variables on the haiku task, a multiple-linear regression was performed with the originality sub-scores of the Unusual Uses task and the circles task as the predictor variables, and the haiku task as the outcome variable. The results of this analysis are provided in Table 2. There was a marginally significant relationship between originality on the two divergent thinking tasks and the Haiku task, p = .055. A step-wise linear regression showed that originality on the Circles task contributed significantly (R = 10.3%) towards predicting haiku scores, p = .000.
The second hypothesis predicted that scores on measures of convergent thinking would be related with scores on measures of realistic creativity and self-reports of previous creative achievement. To test this hypothesis, a correlational analysis was performed on the Remote Associates task (RAT), the Children's Remote Associates task (CRAT), the haiku task, and the CAQ. The results of this analysis are summarized in Table 1. The relationship between convergent thinking and realistic creativity produced mixed results. Table 1 shows that while no significant relationship was found between the CRAT and the haiku task, a significant relationship was demonstrated between the RAT and the haiku task. These results are inconclusive and do not support our hypothesis.
Convergent thinking did not seem to be significantly related to self report of previous creative accomplishment. As shown in Table 1, no significant relationship was found between the CRAT and the CAQ, or the RAT and the CAQ. Participants who exhibited higher levels of convergent thinking tended to have fewer previous creative accomplishments. These results do not support our hypothesis.
The purpose of this study was to examine the ways in which different available
measures of creativity might be related to each other. Measures of convergent thinking, divergent thinking, realistic creativity, and self-report were examined. The results showed that the originality sub-score for both of the divergent thinking tasks was positively correlated with the realistic creativity task. The originality sub-score was also positively correlated with self-report of creative accomplishment.
Our findings suggest that one of the main forces behind creativity could be the factor of "originality". Guilford (1950) considered "novelty", in the way of producing uncommon but serviceable ideas, to be a primary element for defining a creative person. This implies that in order to be creative a person must be able generate many ideas, which would increase the likelihood of coming across a novel one, but must also be capable of the focused thinking that creates answers that are functional (Cropley, 2006).
Interestingly, neither the category of "fluency", nor the category of "flexibility", was significantly related to higher scores on the realistic assessment of creativity (Table 1). This suggests that divergent thinking alone probably cannot account for creative end-products. Rather, there is likely another process taking place which works with originality. Previous researchers have theorized that convergent thinking is that second process (Cropley, 2006). In this model, divergent thinking allows for the brainstorming of original ideas while convergent thinking allows for the critical appraisal of these ideas (Cropley, 2006).
In this study, the relationship between convergent thinking and realistic creativity was inconclusive. The results showed that while the original Remote Associates task (RAT) was significantly related to higher scores on the haiku task, the Children's Remote Associates task (CRAT) was not. Though the RAT and CRAT themselves were significantly related, the correlation was not overwhelmingly strong, and it is possible that this new task simply did not measure convergent thinking as well as the original. If this was the case, it is possible that given only the correlation between the original RAT and haiku scores we could conclude that convergent thinking was in fact related to realistic creativity.
The use of an adapted version of the RAT was a significant limitation of this study. The purpose of using the CRAT was to test it for later use with a younger population. However, the results of this study may have been stronger had a time-tested measure of convergent thinking been used. Future research in this area should focus on identifying another method of testing convergent thinking that can be paired with the RAT.
Another limitation of this study was the fact that both the RAT and the CRAT had over 40 items each for the participants to answer. The researcher running the study noticed that many participants seemed to become bored with the task towards the end of the allotted 7 minutes. This appeared to be more of a problem with the RAT, which was a more difficult task. When coding the data, it was noted that a number of the participants did not even reach the last page of the RAT. While it is possible that this was due to time constraints, given the information about participants seeming to "not try" towards the end of the task, it seems that boredom was a very likely culprit. If this is the case, the number of RAT trio's answered per participants could be lower than normal, artificially lowering the correlation between convergent thinking and the haiku. This problem could be corrected for future studies by limiting the number of items on these tasks.
As predicted, different measures of creativity relate to each other in different ways. The originality sub-score for divergent thinking measures has a clear relationship with realistic creativity, while convergent thinking measures seem like they may have a relationship with realistic creativity given better assessments. This finding suggests that future research could focus on defining a unified assessment of creativity. This type of assessment would acknowledge that no one definition of creativity can account for the many dimensions involved, and a more holistic account could be an excellent resource for future creative investigations.

The process of learning has sparked a great deal of research in the field of biopsychology. The mechanism by which an animal acquires a memory, stores it, and later retrieves it is a procedure that has yet to be fully explained. Throughout history, paradigms such as operant conditioning and classical conditioning have provided possible models to more effectively study learning. The topic of how one learns has been narrowed even further; specifically, interest has been generated in the connection between stimuli and their fear-induced responses (Maren, Aharonov, Stote, and Fanselow, 1996). The fear response produced by an animal can both hinder and improve the survival and quality of life experienced (LAB LECTURE, 2006). In humans, fear arising from phobias or post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) may impede his/her ability to function on a daily basis. For example, if a patient has a phobia of heights, and he or she is hired by a company with an office on the hundredth floor of a building, a conflict is inevitable. Conversely, the ability to produce a fear response may actually be vital to one's survival; therefore, fear is not completely maladaptive. For example, the same patient's phobia of heights will prevent him or her from doing a potentially life-threatening activity like sky-diving. Understanding the mechanism by which a fear response is acquired and expressed will be invaluable to the advancement of pharmacology and psychology.
More specifically, scientists have become extremely interested in the cellular mechanisms involving the formation and storage of new memories. Recently, research has indicated the importance of the amygdala in fear conditioned learning (Maren et al, 1996). Studies have shown that both lesions in the amygdala and pharmacological inactivation produce insufficient responses in both the formation and demonstration of fear conditioned learning (Maren et al, 1996). Also, synaptic plasticity has been established as a critical feature of the learning process in the brain, specifically, long-term potentiation (LTP) or the receptor-dependent strengthening of synapses (Maren et al, 1996; LAB lecture, 2006).
In this experiment, the connection between stimuli and the fear-induced response was studied using a Pavlovian fear conditioning model (Maren et al, 1996). In this model, a stimulus that does not normally elicit a response (conditioned stimulus, CS) was paired with an unconditioned stimulus (US) that normally elicits an aversive response. By the pairing of these two stimuli, the CS began to predict the US, and when the CS was presented alone it produced a fear response. The amygdala is the loci of the association of the US and CS; therefore, the significance of NMDA receptors in the amygdala during aversive learning conditioning was tested (Maren et al, 1996). The research intended to show that by the administration of D, L-2-amino-5-phosphonovalerate ("APV; a selective NMDA receptor antagonist"), LTP, and therefore, expression of the fear response, was disrupted (Maren et al, 1996). The glutamate receptor, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate (NMDA), was hypothesized to be vital to the generation of LTP in the amygdala for the expression of fear conditioned learning (LAB LECTURE, 2006).
Forty-Eight (two subjects per group) male Long-Evans (hooded) rats were used. The rats were supplied by Harlan and weighed from 175-199 grams when received. The rats were handled daily two weeks prior to surgery, and were maintained on a 12 hour light/dark cycle (light: 7:00 am; dark 7:00 pm). The dummy cannulae were changed daily after the surgery until the time of the drug infusion.
The unconditioned stimulus (US) was a mild (0.6 mA) one second footshock in the chamber which was given during the training session. The conditioned stimulus (CS) consisted of the environmental context; i.e. the chamber in which the rats were placed. The chamber was a small box with a transparent door. The floor of the chamber consisted of a metal grating of rods through which the shock was transmitted, and under the grating was a metal pan to collect any droppings. On one side of the chamber there was also a dim light. Rats were also subject to the odor of a vinegar solution which was used to clean the chamber in between trials. The unconditioned response (UR) was the unlearned reaction to the shock. This reaction entailed a startled reaction and specifically jumping in response to the US. The conditioned response (CR) involved the learned response of freezing. Freezing behavior in rats specifically consists of somatic immobility. Freezing is also associated with an increase in heart rate, and respiration. The independent variable for this experiment was the difference of drug administration between groups (APV treated rats v. control rats). Whereas the dependent variable was the rat behavior which was recorded (specifically freezing) for analyzing fear conditioning. Rearing, grooming and locomotion were also recorded and therefore additional dependent variables.
After anesthetization with sodium pentobarbital, rats were mounted on a stereotaxic surgical device. This device allows for the precise location of various brain regions to be mapped and for accurate implantation of guide cannulae. An incision of the skin was made in the scalp and the skin was held back by hemostats. A drill was used to make holes in the skull in order to implant the cannulae. Using coordinates found in a stereotaxic atlas, guide cannulae were implanted bilaterally into the basolateral amygdala. Screws were placed in the skull for support, and the screws and cannulae were held in place by a coating of commonly used dental cement which covers the open surface of the skull. Dummy cannulae were inserted into the guides to avert any type of obstruction. The dummies were changed daily, as the rat was given a minimum of one week to recover from surgery.
Drug or saline was infused using a 10 µL Hamilton syringe which was attached to an infusion pump cannula which extended 1 mm further than the guide cannula. After removal of the dummy cannulae, the infusion cannulae were inserted into the guide cannulae. This ensured that the drug was locally administered to the amygdala, the brain region which is of primary concern. In the control rats, 0.5 µL 0.9% sterile saline was infused at a rate of 0.1 µL/min for five minutes. In the experimental group, the same volume of aminophosphonovalerate (APV) in 0.9% sterile saline was infused at the same rate. The infusion cannulae were removed one minute after the completion of the drug administration and replaced by clean dummy cannulae. One minute was given in order for the drug to diffuse, after which the rats were taken to the chambers for the training session.
Each rat was placed in a chamber, and three behaviors (freezing, grooming, and rearing) were independently scored, one by each team member. The session lasted four minutes, and recordings were made based on a time-sampling procedure. No footshocks or other stimuli were administered for this session. Recordings were determined at ten second intervals for a total of twenty four recordings for each behavior scored. After the session, the rat was removed from the chamber and returned to its home cage. The chamber was then cleaned using a weak vinegar solution, and the collecting pan was removed and cleaned. This process was then repeated for the second rat.
Each rat was then placed in a bucket near the infusion pump where infusions of APV or saline were administered (see Drug Infusion above). The infusions were only carried out during week one. Rats were placed in chambers and a computer program MED-PC IV, which delivered the footshocks, was operated. Footshocks were initiated at one for four minutes. No recordings were taken. After the session was completed, each rat was returned to its home cage and the chamber was cleaned as described above in the Pre-training procedure. This process was also repeated for the second rat.
These same procedures were repeated again two weeks later in the second session. The procedures were equivalent to the procedure the first session described above except for the absence of drug infusion for the second session.
Before training the freezing behavior of both groups of rats did not differ significantly and was very low. However, freezing behavior increased greatly in the first post-training session for both the saline group (2.6→87.67%) and the APV treated group (4.86→44.97%). APV only increased freezing behavior by about half of the increase seen in the saline controls. Two weeks later in the second post-training session, the freezing behavior decreased to a great extent in both saline (87.67→21.53%) and APV groups (44.97→15.08%), yet the freezing behavior of APV treated rats was still lower than that of the saline group. After the retraining session, both groups increased dramatically in the amount of time spent freezing (96.53 % for saline, and 89.76% for APV), and there was not a great difference between the two groups (Figure 1).
In the pre-training session, there was no considerable difference between the groups grooming behavior (9.9% for APV and 7.81% for saline). In the first post-training session, the levels of grooming in the APV treated group increased slightly to 12.85% whereas that of the saline group significantly decreased to 0.69%. Two weeks later in the second post-training session, the levels of grooming in both groups returned to levels exceptionally close to the levels seen in pre-training (10.76% for APV, and 8.68% for saline), and there was no significant difference between the two groups. However, in the post-retraining both groups declined vastly: 0.69% of the APV group and 0% of the saline group showed grooming behavior (Figure 2).
Before training, rearing behavior did not differ significantly between the two groups (23.44% for APV and 26.25% for saline). After training rearing declined in both groups, yet it declined much more in the saline treated group (26.25→4.17%) compared to the APV group (23.44→11.46%). In the second post-training session, rearing behavior increased again in both the saline group (4.17→15.97%) and the APV group (11.46→18.75%). Again, rearing behavior was less in the saline treated group. In the post-retraining session, rearing for both groups declined remarkably: 1.22% in APV treated rats and 0.69% in the saline group (Figure 3).
In the pre-training session, no significant differences were seen between the control group and the experimental group (33.3% for APV and 31.25 for saline). In the post-training 1 session, locomotion declined in both groups. In the APV treated group locomotion decreased by almost one third (33.3→12.5%). The decrease observed within the saline treated group was markedly greater as no locomotion was recorded in the post-training group (31.25→0%). In the second post-training session, locomotion did not change from the first pre-training session for the APV treated group (12.5%). However, locomotion increased greatly in the saline treated group (0→45.83%). The locomotion observed in the rats in the post-training 2 (45.83%) session was also much greater than the pre-training session (31.25%). After retraining, locomotion decreased in both the APV treated group (12.5→5.56%) and the saline controls (45.83→2.78%) (Figure 4).
By analyzing the results, we found some of the information to be expected based on our background knowledge of the biology of the brain, but there were also some surprising outcomes. As anticipated, both rats had low levels of fear behavior in the pre-training trial because the chamber had not yet been paired with the aversive stimulus, the shock (4.86 APV rats and 2.6 SAL rats for freezing percentage). With classical conditioning, the conditioned stimulus must be paired with the unconditioned stimulus in order for an association, and in this point of the learning, that had not been done yet. Along with the absence of freezing and other fear responses during the pre-training, the rats also showed similar levels of grooming and rearing, because they were not preoccupied with fear of the chamber yet.
The division in behaviors became apparent in post-training week 1 when rats in the APV group spent a considerably less amount of time freezing than the SAL group, and thus more time grooming and rearing (freezing percent: 44.97 vs. 87.67). This finding is very similar to Maren's study on APV infusion, where the experimental group showed that the drug "severly blunted the acquisition of immediate postshock freezing" (Maren et al., 1996). There are many explanations for why the APV rats showed less fear response after being shocked at the same intensity as their SAL counterparts. Perhaps the drug interfered with the acquisition of the fear learning at the time of training by blocking the NMDA receptors that are crucial to learning. If the rat could not encode the experience properly, then it could not consolidate or recall it at a later time because the association wouldn't have entered into memory. Possibly by blocking the receptors during the experience, the drug also disrupted the expression of fear, shown by less freezing than the control group. A way to test if it is both acquisition and expression is to place the rat back in the cage when it is drug free. If it does not show the fear response still, it is clear that it did not acquire the learning in the first place. If the rat did instead demonstrate freezing, that would show acquisition happened but the drug simply interfered with exhibiting the response.
As with any experiment, a few of the results were somewhat unexpected and warranted a closer look as to the reason they did not match our predictions. We thought that the testing in post-training week 2 would yield similar results with respect to comparing freezing levels between the rats. Nevertheless, both the APV and SAL groups showed a sharp decrease in freezing behaviors during this testing (APV 15.08% and SAL 21.53%). Since the SAL group was so low, it brings up the question of whether or not we actually blocked long term memory of fear in the APV group. This result suggests that similar factors could have played a role in decreasing freezing in week 2, even though one group received drugs and the other didn't. For instance, perhaps the time span between the training and testing was too long for the rats to remember the chamber. If they could not pair the environment with the shock, they would have no reason to freeze. It is possible that if the time span was the same, but the intensity of the shock was greater, then more long term potentiation may have been able to take place, and thus better learning.
A small number of rats were also scored on their locomotion during the task, but the SAL group showed much more movement during post-training week 2 than the APV group, which was the opposite of what was predicted. If the SAL group demonstrated a greater fear response because of better acquisition of the association, then they should be freezing, not exploring the cage. Given that the sample size was so small compared to the other results, however, it is likely that the variation is misleading because of the limited information available. If all groups had been able to score on locomotion, a more accurate representation might have been possible.
Considering possible problems with the experimental design also prompts new ideas for future experiments. While there was some concern about the amount of time between training and post-training trials, maybe upcoming tests could study the effect of spaced training over a few weeks instead of a mass training in one session. Spaced trials could produce longer lasting memory and better recall. The results also brought to our attention how important it is to follow lab protocols. During the post-training week 2, when SAL groups also decreased freezing (an unexpected result), it is possible that not all groups put their rat in the chamber at the same time. By remaining in the environment during a time with no shocks, it is possible the rats learned that the chamber was not frightening after all. In addition, this could have interfered with the pairing we were trying to do, because the rat may not have learned as easily that each time he is in the chamber he will get shocked.
In the future, it would be interesting to test the effect that various intensities would have on the rate on learning. I would predict as the intensity if the shock increased, the level on sensitization in the rat would increase, as well as long term memory of the situation. Additionally, other drugs which target NMDA receptors could be used, and at varying amounts. Furthermore, drugs that facilitate NMDA receptors could also be used in an experiment such as this. In another study examining fear conditioning in the amygdala, the rats were infused with corticosterone, which enhanced memory of fear learning (Roozendaal et al., 2006).

It is generally assumed that women have more trouble than men in the classroom, specifically in subjects like mathematics, science and engineering. Gender stereotypes, at both a conscious and non-conscious level, exist in our society and may be contributing to females' behaviors, interest, motivation and performance in the classroom. Each individual male and female uses their own self-perceptions of their gender's success in particular domains in making their academic and occupational choices. Women tend to acknowledge their success in English and difficulty with mathematics (Eccles, Jacobs and Harold, 1990). As a result, college-aged women are not pursuing these male-dominated fields because of their lack of self-confidence, inequitable classroom environment, need of support from instructors and negative interactions with peers.
In college, women are even more vulnerable than men to lower self-esteem and therefore need attention, support and encouragement (Allen and Niss, 1990). Women are usually the minority in mathematics, science and engineering classes, causing their thoughts, opinions and therefore their success to be taken over by their assertive male classmates. In addition, women are more hesitant than men and need a comfortable and unbiased environment to succeed.
Montgomery and Barrett (1997) found that faculty are interacting and responding more positively
Not only are women lacking support from their instructors, but also from their peers. Research shows that women feel resented by their male classmates and isolated in the classroom. As a result, women hide their talent and success in the field to avoid hostility (Montgomery and Barrett, 1997). My observational study strived to better understand how unconscious gender stereotyping affects math performance in the hopes of offering suggestions to students and instructors to help alleviate gender bias in the classroom and create a comfortable and fair learning environment for both males and females.
An observational study was conducted to examine if conscious and non-conscious gender stereotypes affect females' mathematics performance. The study investigated the effect of gender stereotypes through the student's behaviors and participation in class. I hypothesized that females would participate less in class than their male peers because of gender stereotypes.
The constructs of interest were operationally defined. The classroom observer observed the number of students of each gender who asked a question, voluntarily answered a question and answered a question after being called upon. These constructs measured the students' participation in the class where "asked a question" demonstrated the most motivation in the most vulnerable situation, followed by "voluntarily answered a question" and lastly by "answered a question when called upon". In terms of these operational definitions, I expected men to ask more questions and voluntarily answer questions more often, while both men and women would answer questions when called upon.
The observation study took place in a Math 115: Calculus I classroom in the Dennison building at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan. The observation took place on November 17, 2005 from 8:40-10:00 a.m. All 22 undergraduate college students and one graduate student instructor in the class participated in the observation study. The sample of 22 students consisted of 10 male and 12 female students. The graduate student instructor was female.
The classroom observer contacted the graduate student instructor earlier in the semester asking for permission to observe her Math 115 class. The students were informed of the visitor ahead of time but were unaware of the purpose of the study. They were told to behave in the same manner they would any other day in class. On the day of the study, the classroom observer attended the Math 115 class and counted the number of male and female students present. A tally system was used with an "m" for male and "f" for female, in order to count the number of times a student of each gender performed a construct being observed. The classroom observer tallied the constructs: students asked a question, voluntarily answered a question and answered a question after being called upon.
The classroom observer scheduled a feedback session with the observed graduate student instructor to share a report of the study: the previous research, hypothesis and results as well as a discussion on positive feedback, suggestions and preventing gender bias in the classroom.
There were a total of 22 participants; 10 male and 12 female students. The construct "asked a question" had m = 0.182 responses and sd = 0.395 responses; the construct "voluntarily answered" had m = 0.682 responses and sd = 1.524 responses; the construct "answered when called upon" had m = 0.146 responses and sd = 0.351 responses; and the total of the constructs had m = 1.00 responses and sd = 1.773 responses.
An independent samples t-test was conducted to investigate whether the categorical variable gender and the continuous variable measured by the constructs of the students' participation in class are associated. Assuming there are equal variances, the independent samples t-test showed if there was or was not a statistical difference between two groups.
The independent samples t-test found that gender and each of the constructs and gender and the total of all the constructs are not statistically different. With 20 degrees of freedom and assuming there are equal variances, I can conclude that there are no significant differences between gender and the construct "asked a question" since t(20) = 1.303, p > 0.05. I can conclude that there are no significant differences between gender and the construct "voluntarily answered" since t(20) = 1.498, p > 0.05. I can conclude that there are no significant differences between gender and the construct "answered when called upon" since t(20) = -0.435, p > 0.05. Lastly, I can conclude there are no significant differences between gender and the total of the three constructs since t(20) = 1.491, p > 0.05. Therefore, the analysis does not support my hypothesis because gender did not have an effect on any of the constructs or the total of the constructs. I accept the null hypothesis at a 5% significance level and conclude that gender had no effect on student's participation in class.
Figure 1: Student's Participation in Class, below, displays the total tallied results of the observation study. However, the sample of observations is small, therefore it is difficult to make strong conclusions. Note that in the chart, for the "asked a question" construct, the chart indicated the number of questions asked by male and female students during the 80-minute class time. But in addition, the classroom observer noted the number of questions asked by students before and after the class*.Figure: Student's Participation in Class
While the sampling of the constructs in the observation study of the Math 115 class was not sufficient, the results do appear to be consistent with previous research on women's performance in mathematics. The results measuring both male and female participation in class in terms of asking a question, voluntarily answering and answering when called upon, found that men are more involved and vocal in the classroom. In addition, it appears that female students felt more comfortable asking the instructor questions privately before or after class in a more personal and intimate environment, thus avoiding the vulnerability associated with speaking in front of the entire class. The classroom observer also noted that rather than asking the instructor questions, many female students asked questions to their male classmates at their tables, who responded in a positive manner. This observation contradicts Montgomery and Barrett's (1997) findings that women feel begrudged by their male peers.
Figure 1: Student's Participation in Class shows that 12 male and three female students were tallied under the "voluntarily answered" construct. However, the classroom observer noted that one specific male in the class made-up most of these voluntarily responses whereas the three women who spoke voluntarily were different students. This created a bias in the data sample since one male student was an outlier and therefore overrepresented the male genders participation.
In conclusion, these observations suggest that women are participating less than men in the mathematics classroom and receiving less encouragement from their instructor. Therefore, it is important that instructors create a comfortable classroom environment, free of sexist attitudes. Montgomery and Barrett (1997) made several suggestions for instructors to encourage women to raise their confidence in their mathematics skills including acknowledging women's individual achievements and encouraging them to apply for workshops, internships and graduate school in their field. Female guest speakers also serve as role models for women and demonstrate female success in male-dominated fields (Montgomery and Barrett, 1997). In addition, if females are hesitant to participate in class, instructors should request answers from specific "quiet" tables with a mixture of males and females. In the observation study, the classroom observer found that this instructor technique was effective and helped the female students.
There were many flaws in this study in terms of participants, setting and operationalization of constructs, which should be considered and accounted for in future research. First, there may have been a bias because the instructor in the classroom was female. Future research should investigate whether female students receive different support and encouragement from male instructors. The setting of the observation study was also less than ideal since the college course was taught so early in the morning, beginning at 8:40 a.m. The lack of participation from students may have been influenced more by students' exhaustion than by gender, especially since the classroom observer found that students' participation increased as class continued when students appeared more awake and alert. In addition, the data sample was much too small to perform any real efficient statistical analyses. Therefore, it would be necessary to observe the same class on multiple occasions in order to obtain more data to make reliable and valid statistical conclusions.
In the future, researchers should examine if racial stereotypes have an effect in the mathematics classroom. Researchers should divide the sample into White males, White females, non-White males and non-White females and examine which group is the least comfortable and does not receive support and encouragement from instructors and peers, thus putting them at greater risk for failure in the mathematics field. It would be interesting to see if the trends of race are similar to the sexist bias that exists in the mathematics classroom.

Two men. One a baby boomer, one from "Gen X". What important national events have happened during their lives? Which will they term most salient? Psychological research argues that significant political events experienced during young adulthood (a time of intense identity formation) will be considered most important and will have the greatest impact on how an individual views future events. (Duncan & Agronick, 1995) Due to this effect, it is possible to posit the existence of political "generations" formed around the shared experience of particular historical events at a certain age. To explore this idea, this paper will present research data from interviews with two American men of different generations. First, the methods used for the interviews will be described. Next, a brief biographical sketch of each participant will be presented. Third, responses from the interviews will be analyzed to determine to what degree each of the subjects exhibits the proposed construct of political generation. Finally, possible limitations of the study will be explored and overall conclusions summarized.
To carry out this study, two male participants from different generations were selected. One was born in 1957 and the other in 1972. More details on both subjects will be given in the biographical section. The subjects were both interviewed by phone, with the researcher taking notes by hand. The former interview took place on November 11, 2006, and lasted about 75 minutes. The latter was conducted on December 1, 2006, and took about 50 minutes.
Each subject was asked the same questions in the same order. The first section of the interview asked the subject to identify "the most important public event that [had] occurred during [his] lifetime." Follow-up questions asked about other "national events or series of related events [that have] been the most personally meaningful." Subjects were asked to consider the effect of the event on them, its overall importance, and if the event had any lessons. This series of questions had the end result of having each subject select, describe, and evaluate several relevant events from his own life.
The second section of the interview asked about current political views. Both participants were asked, in order, about nine issues. These topics were: 1. Women's rights and gender-related issues. (equal employment, equal pay, abortion, reproductive rights.) 2. Sexual orientation and gay rights. (same-sex marriage, benefits for same-sex couples.) 3. Race relations and affirmative action programs. 4. The balance between fighting terrorism and preserving constitutional rights. 5. The war in Iraq. (justification, success, plan for the future) 6. Financing the government. (taxes, government expenditure, and national debt.) 7. Healthcare. 8. Immigration. (benefits, downsides, possible guest worker programs), and finally, 9. Economic globalization and international trade. Asking about these nine topics produced a fairly comprehensive view of each subject's political beliefs. What follows is a brief biographical summary of each participant's life.
The second participant, "Jack", is a 34-year-old male (b.1972) who presently lives near Dallas, Texas. He was born in California, moved to Michigan as a baby, and moved back to Northern California at age seven where he resided through college. Jack was raised in an upper middle-class household, as his father was a successful executive at Ford Motor Co. Although Jack has three siblings, they are much older than he is, so for his adolescent and teen years Jack was effectively an "only child." Jack's siblings currently all live in separate states across the country. Jack attended college at the University of Southern California where he obtained a bachelor's degree in history. Subsequently, Jack enrolled in a history master's program at the Kansas State University, but he left the program after about a year to pursue job opportunities. Jack held one job with a recycling company before settling at Ford Motor Company, where he worked in marketing and sales roles for nine years at locations in Texas and Michigan. About a year ago, Jack changed career fields when he took his current position near Dallas. Now he works in sales for a medical technology company, selling medical software and devices to doctors and hospitals. Jack is unmarried and has no children.
Frank and Jack not only come from different generations, but they also have different backgrounds, different educational degrees, and different jobs in distinct industries. A combination of all these factors may influence their political beliefs. However, the theory of political generations predicts that the political events these men consider significant should not be influenced by any of these different factors, but merely by the age they were at which the event occurred. Events taking place from age 17-25 are considered most relevant by Mannheim (1952) in his theory of generational entelechy, while Winter (2006) generalizes the "critical period" to about ages 15-23. The two participants in the study conform to the political generation hypothesis in varying degrees. They are interesting contrasts because Frank shows strong evidence of belonging to a political generation, while Jack does not.
When questioned about important political events in his life, Frank immediately said, "Well that's easy. The fall of the Iron Curtain." This refers to the wall built to separate East and West Germany. It was seen as the divide between communist and non-communist countries. Dismantling of the wall began in 1989 when Frank was 32. Although this is outside the critical period age range, Frank characterizes the event as a symbol of the destruction of the Soviet empire. And the Soviet empire is something which affected Frank very much during the critical period of his life. The event was personally meaningful because "I grew up as a child fearing the opposing superpower, the U.S.S.R." In school, he faced drills where the students were trained to hide under their desks or run into the hall in the event of a nuclear bomb. The prospect of nuclear war was a part of Frank's life from a young age. As he grew older, Frank recalls many images of Russia as the enemy. Later, when the wall came down, Frank naturally viewed it as a "major historic event." At the time, he remembers feeling that the world was experiencing change, that it would be different. The U.S. would not have its old enemies, and there would be a different political and economic climate. In fact, Frank worked for the defense industry at the time, and a work joke was how business would decline because "peace broke out."
The sense of the entire world changing is significant because Stewart (2003, p.4) writes that "if events are discontinuous with a previous period in an individual's life, they are likely to have a bigger impact." Because this event marked a significant change in Frank's view of the world, it is likely that other people his age also felt the same way and would identify with each other from this shared experience of change.
Today, Frank understands the main lesson from this event as the failure of communism. And the question for the future is, "Will people want to try it again even though it failed?" Frank thinks "most things tend to go in cycles" (perhaps a product of his agrarian upbringing) and points to countries today like China where he says communism still exists, only with an overlay of capitalism. He also believes the fall of the U.S.S.R. is still resulting in change, and he cites a "ripple effect" with how it has affected Europe, the U.S., the emergence of China as a power, and even events in the Middle East. Frank's young adult experience of a world where the Soviet Empire was a feared superpower still influences how he sees world events unfolding today. Even though the fall of the Iron Curtain took place when he was a bit older, it was the overall experience of the Cold War that was the defining event of Frank's young adult life, and surely others his age would concur.
Besides the effect of communism, every other event Frank listed also occurred within the critical period of his life. They were all memories of presidents, which probably reflects the increased importance of who was leading the country during the conflict with the Soviets. Frank mentioned the fall of Nixon as a significant moment. (He was 17.) He remembers feeling disgrace over Watergate and a sense that it was "embarrassing for the whole country and in the eyes of the world" to have an American president resign. Again, it is not surprising that Frank considers this event important because it too marked a significant discontinuity in history. Something happened which had never happened before nor has happened since -- Nixon is the only president to resign. Frank explained how Ford was appointed and pardoned Nixon. Frank believes the pardon cost Ford the subsequent presidency but served the greater good because it "helped heal the country." Based on this critical event, we might expect Frank's later political views to contain a tendency to abhor unethical behavior and commend doing the "right thing," even if that might be unpopular.
Frank's last significant event was the election of Carter, who served when Frank was 20-24.
Frank lived through events like the Gulf War, the prosperity of the '90s, and 9/11, but none of these events made his list of significant moments. He fits the model of a political generation very well because all his significant events come from the critical period in his life.
Jack, on the other hand, listed events that do not fit neatly into the age range of his critical period. The significant event that immediately came to mind for him was 9/11. This attack on the U.S., where terrorists leveled the World Trade Center towers in New York City by flying airplanes into them, happened when he was 29. He describes how he "knew people could dislike us," but the magnitude of the event surprised him. His main lesson from the event came from the reaction of Americans. He remembered reading about World War II with the Japanese internment, and the "mass hysteria, jingoism," and as he describes it, " "
Interestingly, later in the interview Jack links 9/11, which occurred past his critical period, to events that happened just before his critical period -- the events of the Cold War which were so vivid for Frank. Jack lists a few events he "didn't completely grasp": the reign of Gorbachev and the fall of communism. Because he lived near San Francisco, he remembers the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles (he was 12) and the sense that it was "the USA vs. the Soviets." Here he is experiencing the Cold War through sports -- a medium a child can understand. He also remembers seeing a movie on TV called "The Day After". This portrait of a possible nuclear war was shown when he was 11. Jack links these earlier, vaguer memories of the Cold War with his experience of 9/11 to conclude that "society's based a lot on fear." In his early life it was the U.S. vs. the U.S.S.R. with the threat of nuclear war, and today it is the U.S. vs. the terrorists with the threat of ideological war. Although Jack links the early and later parts of his life, he has not yet mentioned an event from his critical period.
Jack described the Challenger explosion, which occurred in 1986 when he was 14. Although he remembers that the space shuttle accident "shook [him] at that age," the occurrence is slightly outside the critical years. Finally during the last part of the historical events section Jack related some events that happened during the proposed critical period for forming a political generation. There were two such events in his life -- the earthquakes in California in 1989 and 1992 (age 17 and 20), and the L.A. riots that also happened in 1992. The two earthquakes, especially the earlier one which led to the collapse of the Bay Bridge and the destruction of freeways in California, were a "humbling" lesson for Jack about nature's power and our ultimate small size in the universe. The L.A. riots were personally significant because they happened while Jack was at school just down the street at USC. Jack describes the riots as a "major life lesson" about the "anger and frustration that a certain segment of the population can experience."
It is interesting that although these events both affected Jack, they are events of a more local, personal nature. They both occurred close to home and may not have affected other people around the country or around the world quite as much. The major world events that Jack describes (and links in his mind) occurred just before and just after his critical period. This suggests that people of Jack's age may not have specific political events that shaped them into a cohesive political generation.
Expanding the concept of political generation to current politics, several aspects of Frank's experiences from his critical period are still evident. He tends to take a more international view of political issues. This could be due to his young adult experiences of watching political events unfold on a global scale and tracking their effects in different countries. When asked about women's rights, Frank is in favor of equality but acknowledges that it does not exist, especially on the global level. He points out that parts of America and Europe are more equal, yet in many countries women still face harsh inequalities. Regarding the current prison abuse scandals, Frank gives credit to the U.S. "that this stuff is revealed," and he compares this to the Tiananmen Square massacre which the Chinese government tried to cover up, events in the former U.S.S.R., and events in current Russia. On the Iraq War and terrorism, Frank suggests that "the world views Americans as not patient [where] all that enemies have to do is persist and it will cause controversy in the U.S." About the federal deficit Frank says, "clearly we'd love to run a surplus instead of a deficit, but we're competing in a global market." He argues that the role of the government should be to support high value exports and jobs, and "promote industries within the U.S. that help the balance of trade." This is an internationalist view. Overall, Frank took a more international view than Jack.
The impact of Frank's critical period is also evident in a few other comments. He agrees with the need for taxes, but doesn't want a system that "redistribute[s] wealth in a socialist way." This reflects his views on the failure of communism. With regards to President Bush violating Geneva conventions on treatment of prisoners, Frank says he doesn't think the President believed he was violating conventions. Also, Frank (unlike Jack) still supports the Bush administration's Iraq War even though sometimes he feels it wasn't justified. He says, "I don't have all the data that I assume our government had." These relatively more supportive views of the administration may reflect Frank's desire for the president to be a "good guy," not a disgrace like Nixon. Overall, there are several aspects of Frank's current politics that show an influence from events during his critical period.
Jack, on the other hand, did not seem to experience major world events during his critical period. When Jack was about ages 15-23 (1987-1995), the world was in a relative era of peace and prosperity with the abatement of the Cold War and the economic boom of the late '80s and early '90s. "Gen X" is still defined as a generation, but not really by political events. In fact, Ortner argues that " "
It is worth noting that although Jack does not seem to belong to a politically-influenced generation, his views today do also seem to be somewhat influenced by personal events from his own critical period. One might argue then that the critical period can still be important on an individual basis even when it does not apply at a national, generational level. For example, experiencing the L.A. riots exposed Jack to violent racial tensions. This may well be a factor in his current support of affirmative action. He says, "I do think society owes a certain debt to people we brought to this country who didn't have the benefit of a white, Anglo-Saxon background." Jack also believes that the federal government does a poor job of providing programs and says that "any time the government tries to get involved in some sort of national program, invariably it's a bumbling mess." Views like these could be partially inspired by the jarring explosion of the Challenger, itself a government project gone terribly wrong. The online encyclopedia Wikipedia states that the panel investigating the accident "found that NASA's organizational culture and decision-making processes had been a key contributing factor to the accident." ("Space Shuttle Challenger disaster", 2006) These critiques of the government, which came out during Jack's critical period, may have influenced his later views.
To summarize, Frank's accounts of his current political views do show effects from the political events he experienced as a young adult. Also, all the important national events he names fall within his own critical period. These observations support the concept of a political generation. Jack, on the other hand, does not seem to belong to a clear political generation based on the significant national events he describes. It is likely that the generations immediately before and after him feel a stronger sense of political generation. (Indeed, we see this with Frank, who is of the preceding generation.) Jack's current politics seem to be influenced more by other factors proposed to define his generation than by specific political events; however, he still shows some influence from the critical period in his own life if not from one marking his generation. This discovery is a compelling argument for the overriding importance of the critical period -- it is always of some significance, at the very least on an individual scale.
Of course, these conclusions are not without their limitations. Despite the clear differences between the subjects, they are each only a single representative of their generation. A much broader sample from would have to be taken to draw any definitive general conclusions about political generations. Furthermore, it should be noted that the men actually agreed on many subjects, and even with their differences -- with Frank being more internationalist and Jack more concerned about equality and class differences -- it was not as though Jack never mentioned internationalism nor Frank class. These were merely broad trends of difference. Another possible limitation is that there may be third variables at play. Frank's internationalist view might owe partly to his recent MBA education or his world travel. Also, although not detailed, there were several instances where Frank expressed distaste for a sense of entitlement, free-loaders, and handouts. These views could be influenced by Frank's hard work on the farm as a child, and it just shows that there are other variables that might influence political views besides world events occurring during one's critical period.
Still, even with all this, the data available from this study points to two important conclusions. First, the interviews provide evidence (from Frank) that the concept of a "political generation" is valid. Second, they also show (via Jack) that the critical period may be of such importance that it matters on an individual level even when generations do not experience national political events together. Thus, in conclusion, both the broad concept of the political generation and the particular idea of the critical period are constructs that deserve continued attention in future research.

In this paper, I intend to examine three interviews conducted by myself and two other classmates of three separate people who were not born in the United States using the topics of immigration that we have recently learned in our class. The participants come from very different parts of the world, but there are some common topics that have affected all of them throughout the course of their lives. Such matters include the part that gender has played both in their home countries and while they have been here, the role of their families in the structuring of their identities, how generational differences influence their transition into American society, and how transnationalism has affected their concepts of who they are. This paper will attempt to discuss all of these issues in the lives of all three participants and come to a conclusion about what immigrants face by coming to America, no matter where they originally came from.
The first part will outline the concepts that I plan to use to analyze the interviews with textual support from the articles in the course pack and the book by Mahalingam (2006). I will use my own interview as a starting point to see how well they relate to an actual immigrant's experience. Then, I will introduce the other interviewees and compare their life histories to my participant's life history to see if any common themes emerge along the lines of the different theories. I will follow that with a discussion of what the consistencies or inconsistencies in the stories mean and how my life relates to that of the immigrant participants. I will conclude by mentioning the limitations of the study and giving a summary of the main points.
An immigrant's experience is always colored by the gender they identify with. For a large portion of the men, they may undergo a negative change in social status due to economic and social discrimination from the dominant culture, so they attempt to control everything that they can in their lives in order to regain some of that prestige (Espìn, 2006). Immigrant women usually are the targets of the male's attempts to dominate their lives in addition to dealing with outside prejudice of their own, so they are doubly affected by their gender in the new social setting. Also, women, more so than men, have to live up to their culture's idealized cultural identity, which serves as both a source of strength and stress for them, and therefore might play a critical role in gendering the immigrant experience (Mahalingam & Haritatos, 2006).
My interviewee's experience with gender has to do with the apparent gender differences in career expectations in his family. He and his brother have always been pushed along a certain occupational path while his sister has never had the same kind of pressure placed on her. She seems to have more freedom to decide what she wants to do with her life, and as my participant pointed out, "she's the lucky one." Contrary to the cultural gender roles described in Mahalingam and Haritatos (2006), however, his sister does not seem to be the one that is expected to carry on the family's cultural traditions. She does not know how to read or write Bengali, so it appears that it is actually up to the men in the family to pass down their written heritage to their children. The difference seems to stem from the fact that the two boys immigrated here after they had at least finished middle school in Bangladesh and the girl had only attended up to second grade, so it was a matter of exposure to the language that might have prompted the inconsistency with gender theory. Still, it is interesting to see a time when the men are entrusted with the values of the culture after learning about how important women can be in that domain.
The role that a person's family plays in how they handle the stresses of immigration and develop or rework their identity is often the most important one. An immigrant's identity is formed around the decisions that their family makes in how to raise them and teach them their cultural background, and quite often the discrepancies between the two cultures makes for some interesting ideological conflicts (Dion, 2006). Matters such as the level of involvement that the parents should have in their children's lives and how closely they want to adhere to the values of their home country become major topics, and it is up to the parties involved to navigate these influential identity issues to form a coherent sense of self in their new society. Whether the whole family is together in the new country or just one member has moved on, family members often affect a person's level of cultural adaptation in such a way as to influence their identity formation (Sakamoto, 2006).
The influence that my participant's family had on him seemed to be especially concentrated on his choice of a career. Everyone from his grandmother to his aunts to his parents wanted him to become a doctor, so that is exactly what he is going to school to be. He claims that "they (his family) pushed [him] to be a doctor, but it wasn't like it was that strict." However, he also mentions that "when [he] was born, [his] mom decided [he] was going to be a doctor," so it is obvious that he was pushed from a young age to go into medicine. He internalized his family's expectations for him and incorporated their vision of what he was supposed to be into his identity, and now it has become an important part of who he is.
Another aspect of his life that has been shaped by his parent's cultural teachings is the emphasis he places on the language and religion of his home country. They are the two things that he would like to pass down to his children, and it reflects the influence that his parents had in making sure he maintains the traditions of his homeland. During this same process however, he has gotten used to speaking English almost exclusively and embraced some of the cultural trappings of his new culture, such as watching American football. In this way, he has been able to "achieve bicultural and bilingual competency that became an integral part of [his] sense of self" (Suarez-Orozco & Suarez-Orozco, 2001). His technique of integrating the two dominant cultures in his life shows how supportive his family has been in allowing him to explore his host culture while keeping him grounded in their native beliefs, and it has led to his success so far in living up to both cultures' standards.
A topic that goes along with the issue of family dynamics is the apparent discrepancies that exist between different generations of immigrants. The conflict seems to occur when the older first generation parents try to impose their traditional values on their unwilling children in the more Americanized second generation; when the kids realize they actually have more power in the family due to this connection, they rebel against their parents and refuse their traditions (Zhou, 2006). The children of immigrants usually have more social opportunities open to them than their parents, who had to struggle in the new culture just to survive. The new freedom afforded to them by the relative inclusiveness of American society leads to a clash of family values.
The reason that immigrant children become acclimated to the new culture so quickly seems to be the exposure they get while in school. They are quickly introduced to social groups and trends as they are passed down from peers, and it becomes a defining experience for them in how they handle the often overwhelming situation (Suarez-Orozco & Suarez-Orozco, 2001). Since the parents can not relate to such an experience, the children are left to make sense of this new information by themselves, and this generational gap in knowledge may lead to family conflict and an eventual breakdown in the family relationship (Zhou, 2006).
However, the relationship that my participant described with his family did not seem to follow this generational conflict model present in Zhou (2006). I know that he has had more direct exposure with American life than his parents since he arrived here before them, but nowhere did he mention that he had to somehow help them along through the acculturation process nor clashed with them on cultural matters. He points out that they were all exposed to American culture in Bangladesh because of cable and satellite TV and had a chance to get accustomed to it, but I do not think that it explains why there is little generational conflict. Watching TV does not equate to the experience of actually being involved in American culture, so I believe it was his technique of integrating the two cultures in a rather successful manner that prevented any such family discord from occurring.
The international connections that immigrants make between their home country and the US carry a lot of different implications for both cultures. Such connections can be made by either the immigrant traveling back to their home country or through some form of verbal communication. Whatever the case may be, the political, economic, and social contacts they have influence everything from trade policies between the two nations to the mental well-being of the immigrant, so the transnational nature of immigration is an important issue to understand. Communication with one's family members back home seems to have the most observable effect on these domains (Murphy & Mahalingam, 2004), and it appears that technological advances in the efficiency of electronic messaging with one's relatives will have a huge impact on the psyche of people who come here and on the entire global community.
My informant's transnational ties were most evident in his traveling back to Bangladesh almost every summer since he has moved to America. He has maintained a close connection with his aunts and uncles that live there, and he is often updated on the social climate of the country while he is talking with them. This family-oriented connection with his home country has shaped a lot of his personality because it allows him to maintain some of the traditions and values that he grew up with, and it provides him with a psychologically satisfying connection in his life. He can practice his home culture when he is back with his extended family in their native land, and he is aware of what is going on in their political arenas even if he does not vote in their national elections. His family is well enough off that he does not need to bring back money for them to survive, but the other transnational contacts he has supports Murphy and Mahalingam's (2004) inferences about the societal implications for foreign nations and the immigrant's mental health.
These theoretical concepts of immigration will be the framework for studying the interviewees' responses, and I believe they will be effective in drawing out the most significant topics from the conversations. Any major similarities or differences between participants will be explored in these four areas, and I think that they all have major implications for a large variety of people. Each one provides a different part of the immigrant experience, and by putting them together into one analytic argument, I will be able to effectively understand what is most important for people who come to America.
Interviews were conducted with each participant at a place and time convenient for them as determined by the interviewer. Two of the interviews were taped with a tape recorder and later transcribed on the computer; Vidal, the third informant, preferred to not be recorded and requested that the interviewer type what he said directly during the course of the interview. All of them signed consent forms for participating, and no direct compensation was given.
Benji, the participant I interviewed, is twenty-one years old, and he is currently studying biology at the University of Michigan. He moved to America from Bangladesh about seven years ago with his older brother. He originally lived with his aunt in Pittsburgh for two years, but then he moved to New Jersey when his mother, father, and younger sister settled there after immigrating also. He identifies himself loosely as a Sunni Muslim, and he is very devoted to his faith. He plans on going to medical school in the near future.
Vidal is a fifty-seven year old immigrant from Istanbul. He immigrated in 1980, right after he married his wife, and he has two college-aged daughters. He is very proud of his family, especially of his daughters, and he recognizes how much support he has received from them over the years. His whole family is Jewish, and he makes sure that his girls practice their faith as much as they can since he did not get a chance to back in Istanbul.
Mila emigrated from Macedonia in about 1970 and settled in Detroit almost immediately. Although the interview does not explicitly say how old she is, I would estimate her age to be at least sixty-five. She originally came with her husband and their son, but they divorced in 1988 when she noticed that he had become "a different person." She did not know English when she arrived in America, but she learned it by watching television and talking with the kids that she babysat for fifteen years. She now has three grandchildren of her own, and she maintains very close ties with the local Bosnian community.
Many of the stories that the participants told of their immigration and subsequent relationship with American culture appeared to follow the gendered pattern of most immigrants. Benji and Vidal were the first to come over from their immediate families to establish a connection here in America, but Mila had to wait for her husband to get settled here first before she could follow two years later. Also, she was expected to be the "good daughter" and "faithful wife" during her marriage while her husband went carousing around the city with other women, and she felt like she had to maintain that image for the sake of her family (Mahalingam and Haritatos, 2006). She did not know English and could not get a good-enough job to become financially independent, so she had to wait to get a divorce until her son was old enough to take care of himself and support her as well. Benji and Vidal had no such restrictions placed on them, and they were in control of any decision that was made about their lives.
However, one aspect that is contrary to Espìn's (2006) theory about gender is that Benji and Vidal seemed to suffer no loss in social or psychological status because they were able to remain in the middle-class level of society. Vidal got a job on Wall Street that could easily support his family, and Benji's father was so successful that he is now self-employed. Therefore, they did not find themselves wasting their talents in jobs that most immigrants are reduced to, such as the housekeeping done by Mila. Also, they had both been taught English in their home countries, so they were able to maintain their economic and social integrity with the help of good connections and a strong knowledge of the dominant language, which allowed them to stave off any detrimental impacts to their character.
The importance of a good family support system in their home country and here in America was evident in the interviews. All of the interviewees thanked the close-knit families they belong to for either allowing them to come here or supporting them in some way since they have arrived. They realize how lucky they are compared to other people from their home country, and they understand that it was all of their family members that allowed them to experience the opportunities of the United States. Furthermore, all of them relied on members of their extended family, such as aunts, cousins, and grandparents, who were already here to help them with housing and employment. With these kinds of resources available, it is apparent they had many people watching out for their well-being, which they could not have survived without.
In addition, they all recognized the importance of passing down their native language and some aspects of their home culture, especially their religion, to their children. All of them mentioned how they have tried or will try to instill the traditional values of their culture in the younger generation so they know where they came from, which seems to be a consistent theme present in many immigrant families according to Dion (2006). Their experiences revealed good connections with the most important people in their lives, and the importance they have placed on these relationships seems to have prompted them to pass down as much of their familial and cultural teachings as they can.
The most obvious difference that is apparent in the interviews is the age of the participants and the amount of time since they have emigrated. Benji arrived here just seven years ago and is still making his way through college; Vidal and Mila have been here for at least twenty-five years and have adult children of their own. With this kind of generational gap, the information that the older participants provided about their pasts might be less reliable than Benji's. For example, Vidal says of those first months and years: "I forget about them now, you know because things are so different, things are easy. The girls don't know how it was for us because we even forget sometimes." This kind of selective memory to block out unpleasant thoughts is more prevalent among those who have lived farther past them, so the age difference is a very salient feature of the interviews.
An aspect of the interviews related to this age gap that is consistent with Suarez-Orozco's (2001) finding on generational differences is the acculturating influence of school. Benji was the only one to go through any kind of formal schooling here in America, and he is the one that has immersed himself the most in the American way of life. Vidal was connected with American society through work, but he was not as exposed to the social trends and groups as much as Benji was. As a result, his socialization into the dominant society was limited to his family and work contacts. Mila did not attend any kind of school and only learned English after coming here, so she tends to relate exclusively with her own ethnic group. This type of result shows how powerful formal education can be in introducing immigrants to the society, and it illustrates how cultural gaps can form between people of different generations.
The transnational nature of the participants was marked by their frequent trips to their countries of origin. Benji and Mila admitted that they travel to see their relatives in their respective locales at least once a year, and Vidal said that he takes his family back to Istanbul several times a year. These kinds of vacations may be good to keep the family ties strong, but none of them seem to want to ever move back to their home countries. They are satisfied with visiting when they can, and even Benji, who planned on returning to Bangladesh after finishing medical school, acknowledged that he is unsure if that is what he still wants to do.
However, the extent of the participants' transnational ties appears to end at social and family-related travel and communication, as defined by Murphy and Mahalingam (2004). Mila takes some money back to relatives when she can afford it, but they do not seem to rely on her income in order to live. All of their immediate families are at least middle class, either here or in the home country, so there is no need to support them economically. None of the participants are actively involved in their countries' politics either, so the extent of the connection with their homelands is on a psychological, personal, and communicative level.
The theories that have been used to examine these interviews have provided me with a good basis on which to make some inferences about the various topics. For example, on the issue of gender, the differences between the males and the female in their immigration experiences reveals how much more difficult it can be for women coming to America. Mila was dependent on her husband when she moved to this country, and she remained dependent on him for half of the time she lived here. Even after she left him, she had to rely on another man, her son, who could take care of her while she tried to navigate the public domain in her search for work. Her lack of cultural skills greatly hampered her social and economic mobility, and her experience is probably echoed by thousands of women with the same background.
The reason Vidal and Benji were able to overcome their lowered status as immigrants and contradict the traditional theories about male immigrant experience is two-fold. First, it has to do with the cultural capital they arrived with; second, it has to do with the level of responsibility placed on them in their immediate families. The first one was addressed earlier in the results section, but the level of responsibility is important also because it gave them a strong impetus to succeed in America. Vidal was supporting his wife with his high-paying job on Wall Street, so he knew that he could not let the negativity get to him if he was going to start a family. Benji's family relied on him to get a good education, and he did not want to feel like he disappointed them by not attending a good college. Both of the men were able to overcome the obstacles that were placed in their way by remaining dutiful to the people that supported them.
As much as issues of gender were ever present in the interviews, talk of a person's family seemed to pop up with most of the questions. There were many instances of a participant saying how much their wife or brother was instrumental in the transition period between countries and how they could not have survived without them. I think that these experiences described by the interviewees about how supportive their families were have to do with the stereotypically close-knit nature of family units outside the United States. The cultures that the participants came from are known to emphasize loyalty and honesty with people in their bloodline, and that kind of mentality carried over to the people who have traveled here. It is hard for most Americans to understand this connection, but it is a major part in the lives of people from foreign countries.
Related to the issue of family relations is the transnational conduct of the three participants. First of all, the purpose of the interviewees' adherence to some of the ideas of transnationalism seems to be for their own sense of family commitment. They know that they will probably never live in that country again, so they use every chance they get to see their family members and enjoy their time together. However, I also believe that they wish to maintain those ties in the event that they ever need to use them again. They were able to receive so much assistance from the people back home during their time of adjustment that they know they can rely on it if it is ever needed again. They just have to preserve those connections, and keeping in constant contact with the ones they love will accomplish that.
Although generational differences are usually analyzed in the context of families, I believe that the huge age discrepancy in this study warrants a closer look. With that in mind, the fact that Benji is so much younger than Vidal and Mila makes for an interesting comparison of their views on life. They each arrived in America under completely different historical circumstances, and it would be very hard for them to relate to each other in what they experienced socially. Their subsequent levels of cultural involvement are directly related to that because the opportunities that Benji had available to him when he arrived far outweighs what the other two had, even after accounting for Vidal's connection to the working world. It comes down to how issues of discrimination and race relations have changed in this country, and the various generations of immigrants each have a unique experience to speak of.
These life history interviews have had an impact on my life and my perception of immigrants because they show me how hard some people have worked to live in this country. They labored for long hours while they were separated from family and friends just to live comfortably, and they had to change their entire perception of the world around them in order to function properly in society. Although there are much worse examples of immigrants who had a harder time here, these interviewees still made sacrifices in a couple different domains to be successful, and it teaches me to be thankful for the social position I am in.
A limitation of the study was that the same questions were not asked of all three participants. Some questions were phrased differently or may not have been asked clearly enough, and this probably lead to some confusion or misunderstandings on the part of the participant. Another limitation was the different styles in collecting and transcribing the data. One person had to type the dialogue directly onto the computer, so I am sure she omitted parts of answers when she could not type fast enough or she did not deem them worthy of inclusion. Even for the people that transcribed, there might have been problems with the tape recorder or with a section that was hard to hear, so it is not guaranteed that all relevant parts of the interview made it into the final transcript.
The immigrant experience is a diverse and complicated one. There are so many factors that go into each person's unique understanding of the world around them that it is hard to capture what they think and feel with just a few key topics. However, I believe that showing how gender, family relations, generational differences, and transnationalism fit into this expansive field provides a good start for exploring any of these ideas more in-depth in subsequent analyses. We might further explore the gendered nature of immigration and how we can stem some of its negative effects, or we can see what the traits are of particularly successful and supportive families. We could design studies to better examine immigrants from different eras and see how their cultural skills changed, and we can investigate what parts of a transnational identity are most effective for the immigrant's personality. No matter how we study these, they are all important in appreciating people who come to America.

Depression is a psychological disorder which has detrimental effects on not only the individual, but also the individual's family and society as a whole. Research indicates that in any given year, approximately 18.8 million American adults will suffer from a depressive disorder (Robins & Regier, 1990). Further, according to Kessler (2002), one in six adults in the United States will meet criteria for major depression in their lifetime, while one in four will be diagnosable with either major depression, minor depression or recurrent brief depression. Though depression is often underestimated as simply a blue mood or a state of intense sadness, this assessment is far from accurate. According to the National Institute of Mental Health (2007), depression is a disorder effecting not only mood, but also the physical health and thoughts of the individual.
Symptoms of a depressive disorder are serious. The diagnosis of major depression requires that an individual have experienced a depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, or a complete loss of pleasure in all or most of the activities the individual used to find pleasurable for al least two months. Beyond these detrimental requirements for the diagnosis of depression, further symptomology can range from sleep and weight loss to thoughts and attempts of suicide (APA, 1994). Depression lasts for weeks, months or even years (NIMH, 2007), and has in recent research been shown to be a disorder of high chronicity. According to Kessler (2002), more than 80% of individuals experiencing a past episode of major depression will have recurrent episodes. This evidence of high chronicity is one of a few variables which lead to the shocking ranking of depression as the world's number one most burdensome disease according to the World Health Organization Global Burden of Disease study (Murray & Lopez, 1996).
The burdensome nature of this disease warrants further investigation into the possible correlates of depression, which may consequently provide avenues for intervention research to target. One such correlate involves family relationships. There is an abundance of research that suggests that unhealthy family relationships are related to depression. Some of the domains that have been extensively studied include family conflict, support, and cohesion. A two-year longitudinal study on peer and parental support mechanisms in adolescent girls by Stice, Ragan, and Randall (2004) found that poor support from parents was associated with greater levels of depression. Another longitudinal study on support and conflict found that lower levels of support, and greater levels of conflict were related to depression both concurrently and one year later (Sheeber, Hops, Alpert, Davis, & Andrews, 1996). A third study on Turkish university students found low family cohesion to be a significant correlate of suicide probability among college students, even after a multitude of variables such as mood and academic performance were controlled for (Gencoz & Or, 2006). Higher levels of family support and cohesion were also found to be related to lower levels of depression and suicide ideation in a study of African Americans attending a historically black college (Harris & Molock, 2000).
Other constructs similar to conflict and cohesion, such as perceptions of parental alienation and trust, have also been shown to be associated with depression. A study by Pavlidis and McCauley (2001) assessing the differences in mother-child interactions between clinically depressed and non depressed adolescents found that a main difference between depressed and non depressed groups was the lower perception of trust and higher perception of alienation in the adolescent-mother relationship for the clinically depressed group. These results correlated well with observational recordings for individuals without externalizing behavior problems, but did not correlate well for individuals with externalizing behavior problems. This study was useful in that it used different methodologies for assessing parent-child interactions, including survey and observational research, thereby increasing the scope of the findings. Another study by Essau (2004) which looked at 1035 adolescents randomly selected from 36 schools in Germany found similar results, where scores on parental alienation were significantly higher, and scores on parental trust were significantly lower for depressed adolescents compared to non-depressed adolescents.
Papini and Roggman (1992) studied parental trust, alienation, and communication in terms of attachment theory in middle school children. Attachment theory suggests that a healthy emotional relationship between the parent and child could provide a supportive framework within which a child can develop and master new challenges associated with developmental and environmental transitions (Papini & Roggman, 1992). The study by Papini and Roggman (1992) focused on the transition from elementary to middle school, and found that students with higher levels of parental attachment (corresponding to higher trust and communication levels and lower alienation levels), experienced lower levels of depression.
In accordance with attachment theory, the present study seeks to determine the relationship of two parental attachment variables, trust and alienation, to depressed mood among college students. The transition to college constitutes a significant change in environmental conditions, and requires a great deal of emotional maturation, where, according to attachment theory, a supportive parental relationship may help ease the transition. Accordingly, higher levels of parental attachment may be related to lower levels of depressed mood. In addition to attachment, this study seeks to address the relationship between how academically successful parents perceive their children to be, and the level of depressed mood in college students. The constructs of self-competence and self worth and their relation to academics have been widely researched, where an individual's own perceptions of their performance has been correlated with motivational and academic achievement variables (Wong, Wiest & Cusick, 2002). In addition, student perceptions of parental attachment have been correlated with academic achievement variables (Wong, Wiest & Cusick, 2002). However, few studies have correlated parental perceptions of academic achievement with depressed mood. As such, this study will provide a good next step in understanding the correlates of depression by extending the current literature to include parental perceptions of the academic competency of their children in addition to attachment variables.
All in all, I will be testing the following 3 hypotheses in order to determine the relationship between parental attachment variables and academic perceptions, and depressed mood in college students.
H1: Perceived alienation in the parent-child relationship will be positively correlated with depressed mood.
H2: Perceived trust in the parent-child relationship will be negatively correlated with depressed mood.
H3: Higher levels of perceived parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments will be correlated with lower levels of depressed mood in college students.
In this study, participants were obtained through non random convenience sampling and snowballing methods. Initially, researchers contacted their friends and acquaintances who lived in close proximity to them either in person or through email, and requested their participation in the study. Additional participants were obtained by asking participants to provide the name and email address of one or more of their friends who matched the criteria of the study and would be willing to complete the survey. These individuals were later contacted by email to request participation. In this way, purposive sampling techniques were used in order to specifically target certain sub-populations that were required by members of the research team.
The research team conducted power analyses using G-Power, an internet based statistical software, to determine the number of participants that would be required for the study, and determined that for each independent samples t test hypothesis with a medium effects size of d=0.5, a sample of n=102 (n=51 per group) would be required for an alpha level at α = 0.05 and statistical power (1-β) of 0.80. For each correlation hypothesis with a medium correlation coefficient of r=.3, a sample of n=82 would be required for an alpha level at α = 0.05 and statistical power (1-β) of 0.80. The alpha level of 0.05 that was used in this study indicates the probability of detecting a Type 1 error, which occurs when an effect is found where none really exists. The statistical power of 0.80 indicates the probability of detecting an effect that is actually present. It is defined as 1-β, where β refers to the Type 2 error, which occurs when a significant effect is not found when it is actually present.
In order to obtain representative samples to evaluate the hypotheses of the entire research team, which included the subgroups of Christians, Jewish individuals, Caucasians, Minorities, on campus residents, and off campus students, a total sample size of approximately n=350 was estimated to be required. In order to test the three correlational hypotheses presented in this paper, a sample of n = 82 was necessary according to the power analysis. However, due to the convenience sampling method and the absence of an incentive for participation, researchers were ultimately able to obtain a sample of n = 65 participants from the target population of college students.
Tables 1.1-1.7 show the demographic characteristics of the sample obtained by this study. The sample consisted largely of Juniors (20%) and Seniors (47.7%) in college, with the remaining 21.5% of participants being underclassmen, and 10.8% graduate school students (see Table 1.1). In terms of the racial distribution, almost half (47.7%) of the sample was Caucasian, while 12.3% was African American, 15.4% Asian American, 4.6% Asian, 1.5% Bi-racial, and 18.5% other (see Table1.2). The majority of participants who classified themselves as "other" were of Arab descent. In this sample, 98.5% of the participants were single, while only 1.5% were married (See Table 1.3). The sample was female-biased, where 66.2% of the respondents were female, and only 33.8% were male (see Table 1.4). The grade point averages (GPA) of the respondents were skewed towards the upper end of the spectrum, with the lowest reported GPA being a C, and the vast majority of GPAs (83.2%) fell in the A+ to B range (see Table 1.5). In terms of a family history of depression, 78.5% of the participants did not report any family history of depression, while 20% did (see Table 1.6). Lastly, in terms of actual depressed status based on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) cutoff scores, the vast majority of participants (73.8%) fell into the "not depressed" range, while 21.5% of participants fell into the mild to moderate depression range, and 4.6% fell into the moderate to severe depression range (see Table 1.7).
In order to measure depression in college students, the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) was used. The BDI is a measure created to assess the severity of depression among both clinical and normal samples. The measure contains 21 items specifically designed to relate the experience of depression to 6 of the required symptoms for DSM-IV-TR diagnosis. Each item contains four statements that indicate increasing severity of an individual symptom of depression. The 21 items are measured on a 4 point scale ranging from 0 to 3. The range of scores possible is from 0 to 63, where higher scores indicate a greater severity of depression. For details on scoring, see appendix C. The clinical cutoff points can vary depending on the base characteristics of the individuals tested, but a general classification considers a total score of 0-9 to indicate no depression, 10-18 to indicate mild to moderate depression, 19-29 to indicate moderate to severe depression, and 30-63 to indicate severe depression. The BDI has been found to be reliable with internal consistency estimates ranging from .73 to .92 with a mean of .86 (Beck, Steer, & Garbin, 1988). The BDI has also been found to exhibit concurrent validity, and has been correlated with other measures of depression including the Hamilton Psychiatric Rating Scale for Depression (.73) and the MMPI Depression Scale (.76) (Groth-Marnat, 1990).
Perceived alienation and trust was measured by the Inventory of Parent and Peer Attachment (see appendix B), a scale that uses 28 parent items to measure the constructs of trust, alienation, and communication in parent-child relationships. The alienation subscale asks questions about anger and interpersonal isolation (ex. I don't get much attention at home), while the trust subscale seeks to find out about understanding and respect in the parent-child relationship (ex. My parents respect my feelings). In total, there are 12 items that correspond to parental trust and 12 items that correspond to parental alienation in the IPPA, with 3 items inversely overlapping between the two. The IPPA uses a 5 point Likert scale that ranges from almost never or never true to almost always or always true with corresponding numerical values ranging from 0 to 4. The 12 items on parental alienation yield a possible range of scores from 0 to 48, where a higher score indicates higher levels of perceived parental alienation. The 12 items that are included in the alienation subscale are items 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, and 24 on the IPPA (edited) measure used in this study (see appendix B). The 12 items on parental trust also yield a possible range of scores from 0 to 48, where higher scores indicate higher levels of perceived parental trust. Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 12, 13, 16, 17, 19, 21, and 22 on the IPPA (edited) measure in the appendix were used to test perceived parental trust. For details on scoring, see appendix C. The test retest reliability for the IPPA has been found to be high, ranging from .86 to .93 over a three week period. The IPPA has also been found to correlate with measures of related constructs such as the cohesion subscale of the Family Environment Scale (a relationship of .56 was found), demonstrating high concurrent validity (Essau, 2004).
The next construct, perceived parental approval and pride in academic accomplishments, was measured by 4 self-designed, non-validated questions that were measured on a five point scale that corresponded to the scale used by the IPPA. These four items were embedded within the IPPA (edited), and were included as items 5, 8, 14, and 25 (see appendix). The items aimed to measure how much students believed that their parents were proud of them in terms of academics (ex. My parents are proud of my academic performance in college). The possible range of scores for parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments was 0 to 20, with higher scores indicating higher levels of perceived parental pride and approval in academics.
In order to recruit participants for this study, each of the five researchers, who were enrolled in an advanced psychology research lab at the University of Michigan, approached a minimum of twenty college students over the age of 18. Some of the participants were previously known to the researchers, while others lived or worked in close proximity to them. Due to the time limitations, the length of the questionnaire, and the lack of resources to pay for participant recruitment or incentives, the researchers decided to use a convenience sample. This sample was chosen based on proximity and affiliation, so as to allow participants ample time to complete the questionnaire while ensuring its timely return back to the researcher. Additional participants were obtained thorough snowballing, where the researchers requested the names and contact information of other individuals known to the initial participants who matched the criteria of the study and who would be willing to participate.
When recruiting participants, each researcher approached the participant either in person or through e-mail and asked if they were willing to fill out a 45 minute questionnaire on depression and associated characteristics. The researcher also told them that they would have 24 hours to complete the questionnaire and could return the completed questionnaire to the researcher at a convenient location or by e-mail.
For in-person recruitment, agreeable participants were given a brief introduction to the study, revealing the general areas that would be covered in the questionnaire. Participants' questions and concerns were then answered, after which the researcher asked the participants to read and sign the consent form (see appendix A). After the consent form was signed and collected, the researcher requested that the participant honestly answer the questions in a comfortable setting. Researchers then made an arrangement for the collection of the completed questionnaire. Questionnaire collection was done by arranging a time and place convenient to the participant to meet either later that day or the following day. The researcher then thanked the participant for his/her participation.
For e-mail recruitment, all initial introductory information was included in the email, along with additional reassurances on confidentiality, where participants were told not to write their names on the participant consent forms if they were going to be returned through email, and that their emails would be deleted immediately after their questionnaires were printed. Participants were instructed to either highlight or underline their responses and to email the questionnaire back to the researcher who contacted them within 24 hours. Participants were also notified that by replying to the email with an attached completed questionnaire, they were agreeing to all the terms put forth by the informed consent document, including voluntary participation and the confidentiality of the responses.
This study presented three main hypotheses. The first hypothesis, that perceived parental alienation would be positively correlated with depressed mood was supported by the data. This finding is largely consistent with previous literature which shows that perceived alienation scores on the IPPA are significantly higher for depressed individuals compared to non-depressed individuals (Essau, 2004; Pavlidis & McCauley, 2001). The present study used a correlation rather than an independent samples t test design (which was often used by previous studies) because the researchers had limited access to clinically depressed individuals. In this sample, only 17 individuals had scores which ranged in the mild to severe depression range according to the cutoff scores of the BDI, and 14 of these individuals were experiencing only mild depression. The small available sample would have likely made an independent samples t test design analysis produce statistically insignificant results. However, by using a Pearson correlation, the results were highly significant, with a correlation coefficient of r = 0.697. In terms of the percentage of variance, in this study, perceived parental alienation helps explain nearly 48.6% of the variance in respondent's scores on the Beck Depression Inventory.
The second hypothesis, that perceived parental trust would be negatively correlated with depressed mood was also strongly supported by the data. This finding is also consistent with the previous literature, which found that perceived parental trust scores were higher in individuals who were not depressed compared to those that were depressed (Essau, 2004; Pavlidis & McCauley, 2001). The correlation coefficient of r =-0.541 results in a percentage variance of 29.2%. This means that perceived parental trust helps explain 29.2% of the variance in responses on the BDI. Perceived parental alienation and trust were measured by the same instrument, the Inventory of Parent and Peer Attachment developed by Armsden and Greenberg (1987). The IPPA Parent Attachment score includes three subscales, parental alienation, parental trust, and parental communication. The former two were assessed in this study. Some previous literature has correlated overall attachment scores, including all three subscales, and found that higher parental attachment levels were associated with lower levels of depression. This finding is also consistent with the findings of the present study, even though the communication subscale was not used.
The final hypothesis, that perceived parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments would be negatively correlated with depressed mood was also supported, though to a lesser extent. The correlation coefficient of r =-0 .319 shows a medium rather than a large correlation. This is also evident when comparing Figures 1 and 2, which show the correlations of BDI score to parental alienation and trust respectively to Figure 3, which shows the correlation of BDI score to parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments. The points n Figure 3 are far more dispersed, and the pattern and direction of correlation are much more difficult to see than those in Figures 1 and 2. In terms of the percentage of variance, parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments only helps explain 10.1% of the variance in responses on the BDI. There is little prior research that has correlated these two variables directly, but conceptually, the relationship makes sense. Parents of college students are likely to place a moderate to heavy emphasis on academics, particularly in a reputable institution such as the University of Michigan. Not living up to parental expectations may then be related to experiencing higher levels of depressed mood.
Overall, this study contributes to the literature on parental attachment and depression by providing additional support for the relationship between the two variables. In addition, this study makes a theoretical contribution by analyzing the relationship between parental pride and approval in academics and depressed mood. It shows that, for college students, how parents perceive their academic competence may be important to their psychological health. However, the theoretical contributions of this study need to be discussed with caution. There were a great many limitations to the present study that largely reduce the validity and generalizability of the findings to any other population. These limitations span the entire research process, from conception to completion. The first limitation of the study involves the hypotheses. Barker, Pistrang and Elliott (2002) point out that research should be able to teach the researcher something new, not merely confirm relationships already known to the researcher. The hypotheses presented in this study were largely based on previous research or had strong conceptual and logical grounding. Thus, from the very start, the findings were already known, thereby violating the very intention of research -- to discover something new. Another major limitation of the hypotheses is that they were all correlational in nature, which means that causality could not be established from the study. In fact, in terms of the variables used in the study, the directionality of influence is a major area under question. It is possible that low parental attachment would lead to depression, and it is equally possible that depression could lead to low parental attachment as a result of emotional withdrawal (Essau, 2004). As such, the fact that directionality cannot be assessed by this study is a major limitation of the research.
In addition, another limitation of the study involved the sampling procedures and participants. Participants were obtained through non random convenience sampling and snowballing, which led to a biased sample. The sample was female biased, and included more upperclassmen than underclassmen. In addition, the racial distribution was largely unrepresentative as almost half the sample was Caucasian. Not only was the sample unrepresentative, the final sample obtained was also very small (n=65) due to limited time for data collection. Thus, due to the small, unrepresentative sample, the findings of this study have very low generalizability to any population other than the sample studied.
The measures used in this study were also somewhat flawed. The BDI is an established measure of depression, but has limitations in how well it corresponds to the DSM criteria for diagnosing depression. For example, the BDI only covers six of the nine criteria put forth by the DSM to diagnose depression (Groth-Marnat, 1990). The IPPA, which was used to measure parental trust and alienation, has been found to be a valid and reliable measure of attachment. However, in this study, only two of the three subscales were used, thereby calling the validity of the items used into question. In terms of the measure for parental pride and approval in academic accomplishments, the four self designed questions had no established validity or reliability, and no internal consistency analyses were conducted within the study. Consequently, the measure may not be reliable. In terms of validity, the items used appear to have face validity, but may not have content or construct validity. The issues that may diminish the validity of the self-constructed questions include not having adequate coverage of the construct being measured, poor, unspecific, or confusing question wording, and implicit premises guiding the construction of the questions.
Other limitations involved participant response issues, including acquiescence, where participants may have had a tendency to agree more than disagree with statements. This was partially combated by using a few item reversals. A more pressing concern may have been social desirability, where participants may not have wanted to seem depressed, or may not have wanted to reveal unhealthy family circumstances. Other participant response issues included participants not finishing the questionnaire, indicating the same answer for all items on a scale, and not reading the instructions. Not reading the instructions may have invalidated the results as some participants may not have used the correct time frame for responses which were mentioned in the instructions. A final limitation of the study was the lack of methodological pluralism, as only one scale was used to measure each construct. Ultimately, in spite of the limitations, the relationship between family and depression is important to understand as family is a central part of almost every individual's life. Knowing what interaction patterns are associated with depressed mood can help provide avenues for intervention research to target which may help improve the quality of life for many individuals.

Winona Laura Ryder (formerly Horowitz) is an Academy Award-nominated and Golden Globe-winning actress. She was born in 1971 in Olmsted County, Minnesota and was named after the nearby city of Winona (Wikipedia, 2007). She was born to author and mother Cindy Horowitz whose family was from Romania and father Michael Horowitz whose family immigrated to America from Russia (Wikipedia, 2007). Winona also had a younger brother Yuri, an older half-brother Jubal, and an older half-sister Sunyata (Wikipedia, 2007). Her father was an atheist and her mother a Buddhist (Tiscali Film Biographies, 2007). Ryder was brought up in a bohemian, intellectual, alternative lifestyle and her parents were friends with many notable people. Her middle name Laura was borrowed from her parents' good friend Laura Huxley, the wife of the famous Brave New World author Aldous Huxley (Wikipedia, 2007). Her godfather is psychedelic guru and former Harvard Professor Timothy Leary, and other family friends included beat poets Allen Ginsberg and Lawrence Ferlinghetti whose famous works were often on the subject of drug experiences (Tiscali Film Biographies, 2007).
When Winona Ryder was seven years old, her family relocated to a commune called Rainbow in northern California where they lived with seven other families on 300 acres of land (Tuscali Film Biographies, 2007). The remote property had no electricity or television, thus Ryder was an avid reader when she was a young child, especially relating to the novel The Catcher In The Rye (Wikipedia, 2007). However, her mother, who later became a producer of educational movies, often showed films for the children in the commune barn, sparking her daughter's interest in acting (Tiscali Film Biographies, 2007).
When Ryder was ten years old, her family moved to the Bay Area in northern California, where they enrolled her in public school (Wikipedia, 2007). In her first week at school, she was battered by fellow classmates who thought she was an effeminate, homosexual boy. Both as a result of that trauma and her difficulty acclimating after commune life, Ryder was home-schooled (Tiscali, 2007). During this period, her parents allowed her to enroll at the American Conservatory Theatre and she expressed her seriousness about a film career (Tiscali, 2007). Success came early for Winona Ryder as she took on many roles at a young age, including: Lydia in Beetlejuice, Veronica in Heathers, and Myra in Great Balls of Fire to name a few.
Ryder became romantically involved with Johnny Depp for three years and when the relationship came to an end, Ryder pulled out of her role in Godfather 3, citing exhaustion and illness brought on by overwork. Then because she was suffering from chronic insomnia, she booked herself into a psychiatric clinic for five days. After several more movies made, Ryder dropped out of the movie Lily and the Secret Planting in 2001 and visited Dr. Jules Lusman for chronic pain from scoliosis and an elbow injury from Mr. Deeds. Lusman, known for his dealing with celebrities and prescribed an opiate-based painkiller, had been under investigation for over-prescribing such drugs. In December, Ryder was caught shoplifting at Saks Fifth Avenue on Wilshire Boulevard for items valued at $5,560 after having used scissors to cut off the security tags. When she was searched, the police found she was carrying Demerol, Endocet, Vicodin, and Vicoprofen. She was sentenced with 480 hours of community service and three years' probation, and was ordered to pay $3,700 in fines and $6,355 in restitution (Tiscali, 2007).
I hypothesize that Winona Ryder has the psychological disorder of kleptomania. Kleptomania is a compulsive conduct disorder whose symptoms include recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal objects, which are not needed for personal use or for their monetary value (Wikipedia, 2007). The diagnostic criteria defined in the DSM-IV emphasizes that although individuals with kleptomania experience a sense of tension immediately before committing a theft, and experience pleasure, gratification, or relief afterwards, the stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance, is not in response to a delusion or hallucination, and cannot be explained by another psychological disorder such as a manic episode (DSM, 1994). All of these symptoms are necessary for diagnosis.
The exact cause of kleptomania is unknown, but there are many theories and speculations. Because of the lack of psychological well-being (particularly mood disorders, substance abuse disorders, and eating disorders) in many kleptomaniacs, it has been theorized that stealing behavior is an attempt to self-treat underlying depression and/or driven by a desire to account for an actual or anticipated loss (Scott, 2003). It was obvious by the career consequences following the tumultuous breakup of Ryder with Depp that this loss affected her psyche. It was also indisputable that Ryder was battling drug abuse or possibly dependence at the time of the theft, which appears to be a risk factor. Also, psychoanalytic theory traces kleptomania to childhood neglect. Ryder's upbringing in the commune Rainbow may have left her with a sense of abandonment from her biological parents, which also may be an explanation for her proposed kleptomania.
The classic kleptomaniac has been described by Goldman (1991) as a 35-year old woman who has been caught several times for stealing things that she does not need and can easily afford. As a 30-year-old woman at the time of the incident, Winona Ryder fits this description rather well. This paper hypothesizes that Winona Ryder developed kleptomania and thus needless stealing behavior as a result of her predisposing cause of childhood neglect and precipitating causes of both the deterioration of her relationship and opiate abuse or dependence.
The research done for the purpose of this case study was all archival -- or using previously compiled information to answer research questions. The well-known shoplifting incident involving Winona Ryder in 2002 sparked my interest; however, I had to evaluate the difference between regular thefts and shoplifting with the psychological disorder. I first referenced kleptomania in general to explore the difference between shoplifting or theft and kleptomania. For these references, I used the following sources: Wikipedia, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-IV, C. Scott's article entitled Kleptomania (2003), and M.J. Goldman's article entitled Kleptomania: making sense of nonsense (1991). The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-IV was particularly important in deciphering the diagnostic criteria necessary to diagnose kleptomania, which indicated that a large factor was the lack of need in stealing behavior. I then used the following references to obtain information about Winona Ryder's personal history and background: Wikipedia and Tiscali Film Biographies. Finally, I used Runyan's article (1981) in order to evaluate other interpretations of Ryder's stealing behavior. Further research is suggested in order to determine whether or not Winona Ryder is definitively afflicted with kleptomania.
The first aspect of the hypothesis to be evaluated is the predisposing factor of childhood neglect in the case of Winona Ryder. The effects of childhood neglect are considered to have long-term effects on psychological development. It is also true that co-morbidity in impulse control disorders under which kleptomania is classified. These disorders are classified by an individual's willingness to reap short-term benefits at the expense of long-term losses and are considered related to Obsessive Compulsive Disorders, likely due to the fact that kleptomaniacs experience recurrent thoughts paired with urges to steal (Wikipedia, 2007). Ryder's alternative upbringing at the Rainbow commune suggests that although she may have ultimately been cared for, the care was not necessarily by her biological parents and the style of upbringing may have been otherwise stressful. Ryder recalled later that in the commune "everyone walked around naked," and "It wasn't a nightmare, but it was no Utopia as a child, in northern California it gets really freezing in the winters. We had no electricity, no running water. Everyone was looking after everyone's else's kids and sometimes I just wanted my own family" (Tiscali, 2007). This quote suggests that she also may not have always been afforded necessities that most children in the United States have readily available.
This impulsive behavior is also consistent with the fact that Ryder was clearly dealing with a drug abuse or dependence problem at the time of the theft. It was reported that she had filled up to 37 prescriptions written by 20 doctors, using six different aliases, in a three-year period (Wikipedia, 2007). This information leads one to believe that there were many psychological issues that may have been co-morbid with her kleptomania -- a pattern that is typically seen with the disorder. A likely stressor that may have brought on depression in Ryder was her breakup with Depp. Ryder took the demise difficultly, allowing for it to interfere with her career (as she dropped out of Godfather Three), and also forcing her to check into a psychiatric clinic (citing insomnia). Unlike many cases of shoplifting, the stealing associated with kleptomania is not usually planned or motivated in the slightest by need or in some cases desire. In kleptomania, it seems that the act of stealing is more important than the items themselves. Because Winona Ryder was a successful actress who was making approximately three million dollars per movie at the time of the crime, it is obvious that need was not a factor in her decision to steal. In addition, approximately 80% of kleptomaniacs are women, making gender a risk factor for kleptomania.
Although we are unable to definitively determine how Winona Ryder felt immediately before and after committing the theft, we can presume that the tension/pleasure diagnostic criteria are plausible. It is definitive that she was unable to resist urges to steal as evidenced by the monetary extent of items stolen. Ryder's reaction to the incident also did not indicate that her stealing behavior was committed to express anger or vengeance, nor can it be explained by a manic or other psychotic episode. The defense claimed that the incident was a "misunderstanding" and that she was just carrying items between the store departments. This story ultimately failed and does not discount the possibility of a kleptomania diagnosis.
Because the diagnostic criterion for defining kleptomania is rather vague and has high generality potential, I would suggest more research on the topic of Winona Ryder. For example, a diagostic test could be given to Ryder. Diagnosis is typically done using the Structured Clinical Interview for Kleptomania (SCI-K), the semi-structured Minnesota Impulsive Disorders Interview (MIDI), or the Irresistible Impulse Test in legal proceedings (Scott, 2003). Archival research seemed to indicate that the Irresistible Impulse Test was not given to Ryder, although she faced severe criminal charges. Both Winona Ryder's predisposing and precipitating factors strongly point in the direction of the diagnosis of kleptomania, yet it is difficult to prove the hypothesis without utilizing further research.
Other explanations or interpretations are possible as well. For example, it could be that Ryder ingested so many intoxicating prescription opiates at the time of the incident that her judgment was altered, or her body control lost. A weakness of the diagnosis of kleptomania is that reliability and validity may be affected by the fact that kleptomania is often co-morbid with other mental health illnesses, including: mood disorders, anxiety disorders, eating disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and alcohol and substance-abuse disorders. However, this creates a predicament because in order for kleptomania to be diagnosed, an individual's stealing behavior cannot be explained by another disorder. Runyan (1981) makes the point that for every action, there are many possible explanations of which possibly all are true, none are true, or some are true. For example, in this case, it is possible that the effect of opiate contributed to Ryder's stealing behavior, but did not necessarily cause it. There are always complicated interactions that determine decision-making and to ascribe explanations from an outside perspective is extremely difficult.
It is also possible that she did not lose control of her impulses, but expected that her celebrity status would skate her through any trouble that she may encounter following her actions. If Ryder's thefts were a conscious choice motivated by desire then her condition may not be kleptomania after all. In kleptomania, it seems that the act of stealing is more important than the items themselves. Persons with kleptomania have been known to leave stolen goods unopened, throw them away, donate them to charities, or return to the stores to apologize and atone for their behavior. In addition, because many kleptomaniacs know that their condition is out of their own control and is in conflict with their own self-image, they may call stores before they arrive to warn the clerks of their condition (Scott, 2003). It would be interesting to evaluate whether or not Ryder fits into this criteria or not, but it is impossible to know since she was caught in the act. The absence of this information is definitely a shortcoming of the case study.
Various treatment options exist for kleptomania, although it is generally viewed by professionals as one of the more persistent mental health illnesses. Treatment is generally designed to address underlying psychological issues that are contributing to stealing behavior. This may explain the absence of future stealing episodes by Ryder. For example, if she sought mental health help for her possible depression over Depp, it is possible that her symptoms would disappear as well. For example, medical records of Ryder from the perspective of archival research are unavailable, and thus it is impossible to tell if she sought help from Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors, for example. I feel as if Ryder's history and textbook predisposing and precipitating causes over-rules other possible explanations.

Gender identity development is one the most crucial milestones that a child attains. An individual's gender identity can be an important mediator of his or her life experiences and in his or her development of a self-concept. Thus, one's gender identity can shape whom one interacts with, whom one becomes friends with, what type of toys he plays with, what type of courses he takes in high school, and eventually what type of job he chooses (Noppe, n.d.). Past research has proven that gender identity development, especially the ability to label oneself as either "boy" or "girl," starts at a very young age. This ability sometimes starts as early as 18 months (Salkind, 2002). However, the most critical years are in early childhood, between the ages of two and six. It is during this time frame that play styles and behaviors are found to crystallize around the identity "boy" or "girl" (Salkind, 2002).
One of the most famous researchers in this subject area was Lawrence Kohlberg (1966), who viewed gender development as a three-stage process. As cited by Salkind (2002), Kohlberg said that children first learn their gender identity ("I am a girl"), then gain gender stability ("I will always be a girl"), and finally they will understand gender constancy ("even if I wore boxers, I will still be a girl"). Kohlberg stated that the final stage is achieved at around six years of age. Thus, one can say that the younger child's cognitive understanding of gender is not as complete as that of the older child (Thompson & Bentler, 1971). For instance, Miller (2007) states that young preschoolers generally fail gender constancy tasks, and that success on these tasks emerges around the ages of 4 and 7.
Using this idea of gender identity development and its three stages, we wanted to see if there is a difference in play in terms of gender between age groups. In other words, in early childhood, do older children prefer to interact with same-gender peers over cross-gender peers when compared to younger children? Or does this age difference not matter? Does the development of gender identity and the attainment of gender constancy influence whom one interacts with? Since research and theories have shown that gender identity develops and crystallizes by the age of 5, we hypothesized that the older children (5- to 6-year-olds) would spend less time interacting with their opposite-gender peers as compared to the younger children (2- to 3-year-olds). We also hypothesized that the older children (5- to 6-year-olds) would interact proportionately more with same-gender peers as compared to the younger children (2- to 3-year-olds), whose gender identity has not yet fully developed.
The participants for this study all attend the children's center on a university campus in a Midwestern town which serves approximately 180 children. The children's center is designed to serve as a resource of the university students for their research needs. University students who are interested in childhood development can use this setting for observation, participation, and research. The center aims to provide a consistent, safe, secure, stimulating, and enjoyable environment for the children and parents are made aware that it is used for numerous research studies. The children's center philosophy places emphasis on a play-based and "developmentally appropriate curriculum" and it facilitates social behavior which develops the children's self-concepts.  Additionally, the center's philosophy has a strong focus on social, cognitive, and physical development through large and small group activities. Since parents send their children to this center with the knowledge that their students will be participating in such observations and studies, we did not have to directly attain the informed consent of the parents. Since making our presence known would have induced an observer influence on the children's activity and levels of interaction, we also did not directly attain the assent of the children being observed. The data collected maintained the anonymity of each child observed. No names or identifying characters were noted. The children were not compensated for taking part in this observational study.
Twelve 2- to 3-year-olds and eight 5- to 6-year-olds were chosen using convenience sampling from their respective classrooms for observation based on availability. The participants were chosen so that there were equal representations of both genders in each group. Thus, there were six males and females in the 2- to 3-year-old group and four males and females in the 5- to 6-year-old group. The majority of the children in the center were White-Americans with a few Asian-Americans and Black-Americans. The socioeconomic status of group is presumed to be middle class to upper middle class since most of the children's parents work for the university.
The five researchers of this study started their observations by having a test day to check the reliability of their measures. All five researchers observed the same child for 7 minutes and 15 seconds (with 30 second intervals for observation and 15 seconds for coding). Using this information, we established that we had .85 inter-observer reliability. After this, we split up into two groups. The first group consisted of three researchers who each studied four 2- to 3-year-olds together. The second group consisted of two researchers who each studied four 5- to 6-year-olds together. We observed the students during classroom playtime hours (as specified in the school time schedule) in their naturalistic setting. We watched students either through a two-way mirror (window in the door) or inside the classroom, if invited in by the teacher. The observation was unobtrusive and followed all the guidelines of the center. We used a stop-watch to measure 30 second intervals of observation and 15 second intervals to record our data. Researchers coded for both verbal and physical interactions as well as the same-gender or opposite-gender interactions (0 = behavior absent, 1 = behavior was present). We spent a total of seven minutes and 15 seconds on each child. We then took 30 seconds to choose another child. Each researcher observed 2 male children and 2 female children. If working with other researchers, they split the children so that each child would not be observed more than once.
In each child that was observed, we measured and coded for two types of interactions: verbal communications and intentional physical contact. We operationalized verbal communication as any type of vocalization (e.g., speaking, whispering, laughing, screaming, singing, humming, sound imitations, sound effects, and crying). This category did not include involuntary sounds like sneezing and coughing. We operationalized intentional physical contact as touching, touching through an object (e.g., exchanging toys), and acts of aggression (e.g., pushing and slapping). It also included throwing an object (water included) at someone. However, this definition did not include unintentional physical contact like accidentally bumping against someone or accidentally tripping into someone. We coded if each behavior was present or absent (0 = no behavior present and 1 = behavior present) under two sublevels: same-gender and opposite-gender peers. Thus, for verbal communication, we coded if a child had verbal communication with a same-gender or an opposite-gender peer. For example, if a 5- to 6-year-old girl was whispering to another 5- to 6-year-old girl while holding her hand, we would code that there was same gender verbal and same gender physical interaction (1 for both) and no opposite gender verbal or opposite gender physical interaction (0 for both). Also, regardless of many times a behavior occurred in each of the 30 second time frames, it was still coded as just being present (1) or not (0). Thus, if the child touched another child six times in the span of 30 seconds, we still coded it as just 1 for physical interaction.
The purpose of our study was to see if older children in early childhood spent more time interacting with same-gender peers as opposed to cross-gender peers in comparison with younger children. We used mean, as a measure of central tendency, and range, as a measure of variability, to organize our results. As can be seen in Table 1 and Figure 1, we found that in contrast with our hypothesis, the older children (5- to 6-year-olds) had more interactions with opposite-gender peers ( 1.88 = mean of interactions per child for the older children and 1.0835 = mean number of interactions per child for the younger children). Additionally, we found that both 2- to 3-year-olds and 5- to 6-year-olds interacted more with their same-gender peers than opposite-gender peers (see Table 1). However, as mentioned before, 5- to 6-year-olds had significantly more opposite-gender interactions than the 2- to 3-year-olds.
For verbal communication, we found that there is a greater difference between same-gender and opposite-gender verbal interactions in 2- to 3-year-olds (see Table 2 and Figure 2). The 5- to 6-year-olds verbally communicated with their peers at approximately the same level regardless of gender (2.88 = mean number of same-gender interactions per child and 2.75 = mean number of opposite-gender interactions per child). The 2- to 3-year-olds, on the other hand, verbally communicated with their same-gender peers more than opposite-gender peers. 2- to 3-year-olds, on average, had .67 verbal communications with opposite-gender peers and 1.83 verbal communications with same-gender peers. Thus, 2- to 3-year-olds had a difference of 1.16 verbal communications per child between same-gender and opposite-gender peers, while 5- to 6-year-olds, only had a difference of 0.13 between same-gender and opposite-gender peers. In terms of variability, 2- to 3-year olds had a range of 6 for same-gender verbal communications per child and a range of 5 for opposite-gender verbal communications. On the other hand, 5- to 6-year-olds had a range of 9 for same-gender verbal communications and a range of 2 for opposite-gender verbal communications. Thus, 5- to 6-year-olds had a wider range of data for same-gender verbal communications than the 2- to 3-year-olds, while the 2- to 3-year-olds had a wider range of data for opposite-gender verbal communications than the 5- to 6-year-olds.
For intentional physical contact, results showed that overall 2- to 3-year-olds had more intentional physical contact than the 5- to 6-year-olds (see Table 2 and Figure 3). For instance, 2- to 3-year-olds had a mean of 2.33 physical interactions per child with a same-gender peer while they only had a mean of 1.5 physical interactions per child with an opposite-gender peer. Along the same lines, 5- to 6-year-olds had a 1.25 mean number of physical interactions per child with same-gender peers and only 1 mean number of physical interactions per child with opposite-gender peers. Additionally, both age groups had more intentional physical contact with same-gender peers than opposite-gender peers. As can be seen in Figure 3, the difference between intentional physical contact between same-gender and opposite-gender peers for the 2- to 3-year-olds (.83 interactions per child) is greater than the difference for the 5- to 6-year-olds (.25 interactions per child). In terms of variability, 2- to 3-year olds had a range of 5 for both same-gender and opposite-gender physical interactions. On the other hand, 5- to 6-year-olds had a range of 2 for same-gender physical interaction and a range of 5 for opposite-gender physical interaction. Thus, 2- to 3-year-olds had a wider range of data for same-gender physical interactions than the 5- to 6-year-olds, but both had the same amount of data dispersion for opposite-gender physical interactions.
The purpose of our study was to see if older children in early childhood spent more time interacting with same-gender peers as opposed to cross-gender peers in comparison with younger children. Our results were both consistent and inconsistent with our hypothesis. The results were consistent because older children showed slightly fewer physical and verbal interactions with opposite-gender peers than with same-gender peers. However, our results were inconsistent because younger children interacted more with their same-gender peers than opposite-gender peers in both types of interaction when compared to the older children. Salkind (2002) found that play styles and behaviors crystallize around a child's gender identity between the critical ages of two and six and our results matched his findings because both age groups seemed to interact more with their same-gender peers than their opposite-gender peers. This could mean that the gender-identity is crystallizing from the ages of two to six. However, our results show that there might not be a linear progression of a more crystallization of gender-identity as a child gets older since the younger children interacted more with same-gender peers than the older children. Thus, unlike the findings of Kohlberg (1966), Thompson and Bentler (1971), and Miller (2007), all of whom stated that the cognitive understanding of gender and gender constancy is more finalized at six years than at two years, our results showed that a child's gender-identity is not more developed at 6 years than it is at 2 years.
Our study also had numerous limitations. For instance, some of the children did not remain within eyesight at all times of observation. Consequently, if a child had been interacting more with either the same-gender or opposite-gender peer, then we could not code for it since we could not see it. This could have clearly skewed our results because these children could have been partaking in behaviors that would have supported our hypothesis while they were hidden (e.g., 5- to 6-year olds interacting with same-gender peers). Also, since we could not hear their conversations, sometimes it was difficult to decipher if the child was verbally communicating with the teacher, another peer, or themselves. Thus, if the child had been verbally communicating with a peer, we might not have coded for it since we probably assumed they were communicating with the teacher instead. Thus, the children could have had more same-gender or opposite-gender verbal communications than was coded for. Also, because not all of the children were present at the time of observation, there was a skewed ratio of boys- to-girls in the classroom, which may have influenced our results. In such an environment, a child did not have the equal opportunity to interact with same-gender and opposite-gender peers. Had the classroom had an equal ratio of boys and girls, then our results might have been different because then the child would have been more likely to encounter both genders. For instance, if the 2- to 3-year-olds had more boys in their classroom then girls, then the girls would have had a higher probability of interacting with a boy. Also, due to the skewed ratio of boys and girls, the same child could have been observed by multiple researchers, which would have influenced our results. If there were only two girls present in a classroom, then the researchers would have all been observing the same child. And it could have just been that these two children were more or less inclined to interact with opposite-gender peers, and thus the results would not be representative of a larger population. There was also observer bias. Because we knew that we were looking for interactions with peers, we may have inadvertently chosen children who were more active, thus biasing our results. Similarly, we may have looked for specific behaviors without realizing it, which would have also biased our results.
Thus, based on our study, it is evident that younger children do have a sense of gender identity since younger children did interact more with their same-gender peers than opposite-gender peers. Parents, educations, and child-care professionals should also be more cognizant of the fact that these younger children do have a developed sense of gender-identity when interacting and communicating with children. For instance, educators could use this information in their lesson-planning to form same-gender groups for younger children to ensure their comfort or to form more opposite-gender groups to encourage interaction between genders depending on their classroom goals and objectives.
Our research also produced some additional and unforeseen results. We found, for instance, that younger children (2- to-3 year olds) interacted more through physical interaction, and that older children (5- to-6 year olds) interacted more through verbal communication. These results could be the product of the fact that children have attained a higher degree of verbal development at 6 than they have at 2. Thus, children could be using the physical and verbal capabilities that they have while interacting. For a future study, we think it would interesting to look into these results and test to see if a child's physical and verbal developmental level has an impact on the type of interactions he engages in. It would additionally be interesting to see if these physical and verbal capabilities have an affect on gender-interactions (same-gender and opposite-gender). Moreover, because of the high number of limitations of our study design, we would recommend that the study be repeated before the results are generalized. If this study were to be repeated, we would recommend that the researchers observe children at more than one center, observe classrooms with equal gender distribution, ensure random selection (by using either single-blind or double-blind studies), and make sure that the children can be observed in all areas of the classroom.

Essential hypertension (HTN) is a "silent killer" that affects 60 million adults in the United States causing arteriosclerosis, cerebrovascular accidents, myocardial infarctions, and end-stage renal disease (Hildreth & Saunders, 1992). The cause of hypertension is unknown (Williams, 1992) and current epidemiological studies indicate that it is more prevalent in African-Americans than all other racial groups (Burt et al., 1995). Moreover, African-American women (AAW) have the greatest gender differential in the incidence of uncontrolled HTN (60% for AAW and 49% for Caucasian women). HTN can be successfully controlled with prescription medication (Kaplan, 1995) and with the DASH diet (Appel, 1999; Appel et al., 1997; Sacks et al., 1995; Scisney-Matlock, Kachorek, Glazewski, in press). Unfortunately, compliance with medical regimes is extremely difficult for at least half of all individuals with the diagnosis of HTN (Branche Jr., Batts, Dowdy, Field, & Francis, 1991). The purpose of this project was to examine how explanatory style (ES) predicts compliance with antihypertensive medication regimens and with other general health promoting behaviors in both African-American and Caucasian women. Additionally, this paper will examine the link between ES and the central nervous system, specifically, blood pressure (BP) as it changes over time.
Attribution theory, first introduced by Fritz Heider (1958) and popularized by Jones and Davis (1965) and Kelley (1967, 1972), posits that people rationalize why events happen to themselves or others. The function of this is to maintain a sort of psychological homeostasis. When we realize that new information is incongruent with what we have come to accept and internalize through past experience, we try to interpret the events surrounding this information or condition in order to arrive at an appropriate explanation for what we're feeling (Schachter & Singer, 1962). Explanatory style, coined by Abramson et al. (1978), and redefined by Peterson and Seligman (1984), is the verbal language people use when trying to mentally organize and make sense of (what Piaget would call "assimilation") new information or a disturbing condition, such as chronic health problems like HTN. ES can be broken down into two different "styles," if you will -- pessimistic and optimistic. These two ways of thinking about the world can be empirically measured via an assessment tool called the Attributional Style Questionnaire, or ASQ.
The ASQ has been used in numerous experimental studies (Seligman, Abramson, Semmel, and von Baeyer 1979; Peterson, Semmel, von Baeyer, Abramson, Metalsky, and Seligman 1982). It is a means through which researchers can examine how people react to, behave in, and understand or interpret various hypothetical situations, ranging from failure on an academic test to being fired from a job. It presents subjects with twelve events (6 bad and 6 good), in which they are asked to rate the cause of each event on a 7-point Lickert scale across three different dimensions. The causes of events can be explained in 1) internal or external terms, as in "I got second place in the race because I wasn't sufficiently trained to compete" (internal cause for failure) versus, "I got second place in the race because the wind was blowing very hard" (external cause for failure). Reasons for events can also be verbalized and internalized as 2) stable or unstable, as in "Because I got second place this time, I will get second place in the next race too" (failure and success are stable), versus, "Although I got second place this time, that doesn't necessarily mean that is how I will do next time" (failure and successes are unstable, or variable). The last way events can be explained is through 3) global or specific terms. An example of this perspective would be a statement such as "I never get better than second place in any running event" (global failure -- it extends into other domains), versus, "I haven't got better than second place in this particular race" (in which failure to do better is limited to a particular event or set of circumstances).
Ratings are averaged across the good and bad events separately. A composite score is derived by combining all scores from the three aforementioned dimensions. Internal consistencies of the composite scores have alpha coefficients of .70 or more. Initial test-re-test reliabilities were quite high over several month periods (R's .60 and higher), (Peterson, Maier, Seligman, 1993). Since then, reliabilities have been bolstered (.70 to .85 range) by increasing the number of events for which causes are offered (Peterson and Villanova, 1988). Potential biases due to answering questions in a "desirable" or particular fashion were ruled out by Schulman, Seligman, and Amsterdam (1987) who found that even subjects given explicit instruction in what the test was trying to measure could not produce these answers, suggesting that the measure is not transparent. Lastly, meta-analysis and the application of ES to depression models have shown that different types of people, at least as studied in the 132 experiments, are not differentially susceptible to tests of laboratory helplessness. If there is a group that shows more helplessness outside the laboratory, perhaps it is "because these people have experienced more uncontrollability" in their life's events, or, simply because of their ES, as opposed to being differentially sensitive to testing effects (Peterson, Maier, Seligman, 1993, p.108; see also Sweeney, Anderson, and Bailey, 1986 for meta-analysis of relationship of ES to depression).
Understanding people's explanatory or attributional processes is especially important in health behavior for numerous reasons. First, people are especially motivated to seek causal attributions under periods of high uncertainty (Gerard & Rabbie, 1961), such as when medical information is unclear, or when physiological symptoms are unfamiliar or difficult to evaluate objectively. Second, illness itself causes general distress and/or inconvenience. People might draw "inaccurate or distressing inferences" about what is wrong with them when they feel poorly. These "misattributions, in turn, lead to inappropriate action or inaction" (Stone, Cohen, & Adler, p. 489). Third, people might put off medical attention, other personal responsibilities, and/or other people close to them because they do not want to let surface or make obvious physical symptoms that they are ashamed of. This could result in both less social support in the face of illness, and/or delay medical treatment. These are some of the many possible reasons for poor health quality-of-life and how attributions (ES) or perceptions about causality are directly linked to health practices. But before scientists can examine the mechanisms through which this occurs (via enhancing knowledge, changing cognitive representations, misattributions, et cetera), the effect of ES on outcome variables such as BP and compliance must be established. This is the goal of this paper. Possible mechanisms for this link will be addressed in subsequent publications.
Inducing people to adhere to public health recommendations purports to put the patients in a submissive position relative to health professionals, but this is not really the case. Patients are active participants in the process of seeking medical care; patients have the choice of deciding whether or not to continue with and keep medical appointments, deciding whether or not to accept what professionals have suggested to them, actually enacting those suggested changes, and consciously deciding everyday whether or not behaviors will be (continuously) carried out at the appropriate hours. Engaging patients in their own health treatment is of utmost importance because managing illness lies in prevention -- personal commitment to lifelong self-care activities and medical care when necessary. It becomes especially difficult at times because deciding to partake in "healthy behaviors," may entail a temporary increase in deprivations or physical suffering. In addition, they can negatively affect people's general sense of well-being and quality of life (Stone, Cohen, & Adler, 1979; Anderson, Hogan, Appel, Rosen, & Shumaker, 1997).
In deciding what course of behavioral action to take (or not take for that matter), people are essentially deciding whether or not they want to succumb to their illness and the course of the disease, or if they want to speed up recovery and limit/prolong further physiological deterioration. These thought processes are captured by the ASQ because this assessment tool gives scientists a realistic picture of what people's perceptions about the chronicity of problems and their pervasiveness really are like in everyday situations. People who view their personal behaviors (preventative health behaviors, compliance behaviors with medical regimes, et cetera) as unimportant tend to have explanatory styles which encompass the dimensions of internality, stability, and globality. Women with hypertension and this pessimistic ES make statements such as, "I have brought this high blood pressure upon myself, and it isn't going to go away so I might as well plan on having it affect the rest of my body -- I guess I can plan on a heartattack soon." People who explain negative events (such as diagnosis with hypertension) and their failures to produce desired lifestyle changes in this manner (in this pessimistic style) also tend to do so in the future, despite their inclination and/or knowledge that such thinking and such acts are harmful to their physical health.
For instance, Wiliams and Brewin (1984) studied people's reactions to test failure and found that people who explained their failure with stable terms reduced their expectancy for future success at the test. Hence, this measure has been used as a means of operationalizing persistence. In this particular case, subjects' pretest expectancy for and incentive for success was either impeded by or facilitated by their attributional style. Concrete evidence of the effects of attributional style on performance of particular behaviors have also been researched by Peterson & Bossio (1991), Nolen-Hoeksema, Girgus, and Seligman (1986), Steele and Southwick (1981), and Anderson (1983). It has been also examined in regards to coping with stress (Major, Mueller, and Hildenbrandt 1985), and in regards to reactions to physical injury or disease (Abrams and Finesinger, 1953). In short, peoples with an optimistic explanatory style have been shown to fall ill less frequently, survive longer when confronted with terminal illness, recover from illness more successfully, engage in less risk taking behaviors less frequently, are less likely to die a sudden and accidental death, and deal with stress more effectively.
These diverse research findings all converge in their finding that a pessimistic ES is related to poor health, depression, and what has been coined "learned helplessness", or general passivity. When people believe that their efforts are useless, they are apt to fail to comply with recommendations made to them by both concerned friends and family as well as healthcare professionals such as doctors and nurses (Janis and Rodin, 1979). Thus, whereas most patients are active recipients of health membership and care, people with a pessimistic ES are not at all involved with decision making for healthcare because they believe that their efforts go unrewarded or are simply ineffective.
A "key concept in the reformulated theory (of learned helplessness) is..the habitual tendency to offer the same sorts of explanations for diverse bad events" (Peterson, Maier, Seligman (1993). Such maladaptive perceptions, such as the thought that bad events (be it diagnoses, poor prognosis for disease improvement, an adverse reaction to a medication, et cetera) will undermine and effect all preventative behaviors (eating healthy, taking medication regularly, keeping appointments with health care physicians) will inevitably affect the course of disease because people won't take precautionary measure requisite to better maintenance of their respective disorders. In the case of hypertension specifically, not taking blood pressure measurements regularly, not adhering to instructions for prescription medications, and not eating a low-fat, low-salt diet can exacerbate the disorder, leading to uncontrolled BP and various medical complications. Therefore, effective cognitive-behavioral therapies which will encourage behavioral change are solely needed to demonstrate to these individuals that preventative and maintenance health care is effective at enhancing the quality of physical life.
Never before have researchers examined how attribution theory might explain perceptions about the causes of hypertension and high blood pressure reduction behaviors. This paper will concentrate on how an optimistic ES leads to active engagement in preventative health behaviors, thereby increasing compliance with medical regimes and having and overall lower BP range. The active participation of people with an optimistic ES would also support the notion that persons with a pessimistic ES are not engaging in healthy behaviors because of the passive or helpless nature of this cognitive style of thought. These goals were explored with the following three hypotheses in mind:
H1: Women who attribute the cause of their hypertension to global, stable, and internal causes (pessimistic ES) will be those who consistently have higher blood pressure and are in the high blood pressure classification category (Systolic BP >160 mmHg, and/or diastolic BP >100 mmHg).
H2: Women with an optimistic explanatory style will be more likely to comply with medical regimes such as taking their antihypertensive medication regularly.
H3: Women with an optimistic ES will have higher scores on their health promoting lifestyles scales, suggesting that they engage in more general preventative self-care behaviors, as compared to women with pessimistic ES, across all four group assignments.
Approximately 200 women with Stage I or Stage II HTN, that is, two SBP 140-159 mmHg and DBP 90-109 mmHg at least two weeks apart were recruited (National Institutes of Health, JNC-V, 1993). Patients with uncontrolled hypertension were the target population for this study because patients with higher BP are at greater risk for cardiovascular accidents. They are also an important population to target because Burt and associates (1995) reported that 36% of patients treated for HTN have BP above the 160-95 mmHg threshold, with only 29% being able to maintain BP below the 140/90 threshold. These women were recruited from a large Midwestern University hospital. While HTN is diagnosed equally in both men and women, the wider disparity in the control rate between AAW and WAW (White American Women) compared to men of any racial group suggests that a sample limited to women is necessary if health care professionals are to better understand why this large discrepancy exists. Additionally, AAW ages 34-54 have the highest incidence of uncontrolled HTN (Burt et al., 1995), so it was imperative that the sample be at least half AAW since they suffer disproportionately and die prematurely from the effects of uncontrolled HTN. A stratified sampling approach with Solomon-four groups was used to diminish potential threats to validity of the effects of the intervention from exposure to survey instruments. See Figure 1 below.
These women ranged from ages 30 through 65 years of age. Hypertension is rarely diagnosed in persons under thirty, and for persons over age 65 there is often a secondary diagnosis or medical complication which might be the result of hypertension, or have caused hypertension. This study aims to address issues pertinent only to essential hypertension, not hypertension due to any number of secondary causes (e.g. end-stage renal disease, stroke, or insulin-dependent diabetes).
At time one, women in both of the experimental groups (Groups 1 and 2) were given MEMS© bottles and had their function explained to them. MEMS bottles are plastic containers which people are instructed to place their medications in. (These women were already taking antihypertensive medications prescribed by their primary health caretakers.) Each time the lid is removed, a microchip recorded the date and time at which the pill was taken. The participants utilized the MEMS bottles to take their daily dose(s) of antihypertensive medication for the next thirty days (until time two). They answered questionnaires at this time as well as at the end of the study (time three), ninety days later.
Additionally, women in experimental group one were given cognitive messages designed to increase their knowledge about HTN and the need to take medications as prescribed. These messages were developed so that participants would have a mechanism through which they could "use their own reflections (about their diagnosis of HTN) to appraise, evaluate, and internalize 'how' -- perceptions, preferences, and possibilities -- and 'what' -- beliefs, barriers, and intentions -- a person thinks about specific self-care activities associated with prescribed medication" (Scisney-Matlock, 1995). Content for the messages was developed from interviews, written responses to questions from survey research, and included a comprehensive literature review. The 18 goals that the cognitive messages encompassed were displayed in a wheel-shaped form, so that the messages rotated in and out of a window, one by one, so that the content of only a single message could be viewed and read at a time. (See facsimile WHEEL attached). The WHEEL provided a means through which women could learn about and be exposed to different information relevant to HTN. One dimension aimed to increase general "knowledge" about HTN, another to enhance "skills" to live with it, and the third and last dimension was labeled "attitude," designed with the intent of shaping women's perceptions about having to comply with medical regimes.
Thus, each of the three WHEELS had the same 18 goals on each (9 on each side), but addressed three different aspects of each and every goal: knowledge, attitude, or skill. Women were instructed to read at least one tailored message once a day, and to respond (via a pager provided for them) whether or not they did so by the end of the day. Having the subjects respond via pager not only verified the performance of the intervention activities, but it also provided immediate reinforcement to strengthen the importance of compliance with medical regimens. Subjects were allowed to keep these tailored cognitive messages for the duration of the study, but returned the MEMS bottles after one month of use.
Women in both of the control groups (groups 3 and 4) did not receive the MEMS bottles or cognitive WHEELS messages. They did not have any responsibilities outside of their coming to the clinic to fill out questionnaires as indicated above in Figure 1. Members of all groups however, had their BPs measured on each of the three occasions so that changes in BP could be assessed across time and across group assignment.
Again, the goal of this paper was not to determine how race, knowledge, or cognitive messages are related to ES or BP even though measures of these constructs/variables were included in the design of this study. These will be the topics of other articles. Here we set forth to determine how ES (both pessimistic and optimistic style) mediate preventative health practices and high blood pressure specifically.
Attending physicians at the outpatient internal medicine and general medicine clinics referred possible candidates to the researcher. All candidates were generally of sound mental health and able to read and write English. A protocol was read verbatim to the potential subjects, detailing what their involvement would include. After reading and signing the consent document, each subject was randomized into one of the four groups by randomly selecting from a large pile of numbered envelopes. Subjects who withdrew from the study were replaced. Any subjects who met the criteria displayed in Figure 2 below were eligible for participation:
Demographic data were collected on individual characteristics such as age, race, marital status, menopausal state, support for hypertension regimes (meal preparation and acquisition of medications), educational level, occupation, income, and employment status. Medical information was extracted from lab reports and medical files to determine history of concurrent medical conditions and medications taken. Other measures utilized in this study included health promotion lifestyle profile measures (Walker, Sechrist, & Pender, 1987), and the Explanatory (or Attributional) Style Questionnaire discussed in the Introduction section. MEMS© bottles were used to quantitatively assess whether or not participants were actually taking antihypertensive medications as prescribed.
Histograms, box plots, and descriptive statistics were be used to identify aberrant data points, and to characterize the distributions of the measures and the four groups to which participants were assigned to. There was little missing data, so simple methods of mean substitution and complete case analyses led to equivalent results. T-tests for independent samples were conducted to make sure that the randomization produced equivalent groups.
To address the first hypothesis, planned contrasts (ANOVA) were conducted to compute BP changes from Time 1 to Time 2, and again at the end of the study. It was hypothesized that women with an optimistic explanatory style would have lower BPs at both the beginning of the study and throughout its duration, regardless of group assignment.
To test the second hypothesis, one-way repeated measures ANOVAs were run to determine if explanatory style mediated whether or not medications were taken by participants in experimental groups 1 and 2, and to determine at which times it did so.
To assess the accuracy of the third hypothesis, that type of explanatory style would significantly effect health promoting lifestyle behaviors (as assessed by the questionnaire), repeated measures ANOVAs, 1) total score, and 2) explanatory style type were used as a between-subjects factor and time of measurement (pretest, one month post, and three months post) as a within-subjects factor was used to assess the impact of the intervention on explanatory style and on health promoting behaviors.
Age, race, education, and marital status were not included as covariates in any of the aforementioned analyses because they weren't found to predict changes in BP or explanatory style, and therefore were not regarded as confounding factors throughout the duration of the analyses.
In running the analyses for the first hypothesis, results were as anticipated. Namely, women with pessimistic explanatory styles had higher BPs than women with optimistic explanatory styles both at the beginning of the study and at its very end. See Graph 1 below to examine changes in mean Systolic BPs and Diastolic BPs for women with optimistic and pessimistic explanatory styles across time. Graph 2 below depicts changes in BP by group assignment.
It appears as though it is very adaptive to view failures to engage in preventative and health maintenance behaviors as specific, external, and unstable. When failure to achieve a desired goal or result occurs, this way of explaining the "failure" does not appear to thwart future attempts to do so. Therefore, optimistic ES is adaptive in that it results in increased compliance relative to people who view their illness and their failure to comply with medical regimes/ to engage in health preventative behaviors in global, internal, and stable terms. The implications for this are great. Explanatory style is not just a way of thinking about or explaining events. It is because of the way that one's thoughts are organized and generalized that actions are literally carried out (or not). Thus, even if someone understands or has the knowledge that s/he should do something, that thought will not necessarily be translated into behavior until that person believes that their effort will be fruitful/effective.
The fact that women with a pessimistic ES have higher BPs than women with optimistic ES means that women with pessimistic ES can anticipate having more cardiovascular accidents, strokes, and even premature death than they should perhaps be at risk for. Their way of thinking might ultimately cost them their life because they can not convince themselves of the utility of preventative and health maintenance behaviors which have been established to prolong life.
The CBI implemented in this study was effective at lowering BP to all women who read the cognitive messages, suggesting that even women with pessimistic ES can benefit from reading the messages. Certainly, because they engaged in more health relevant behaviors than they were before having read the tailored messages, they can expect more benefits than those women who did not read the messages (regardless of explanatory style type).
Awareness of people's ES type will cue physicians into types of unhealthy behaviors that can be anticipated, so that professionals can refer patients to alternative sources of support (nurses, psychologists). These social support providers can work with patients to reinforce medical regimes prescribed by primary caretakers. In the case of hypertension specifically, this might include the distribution of the cognitive WHEELS messages. Ultimately, this tailoring of health services to individual needs will lead to enhanced quality of life in patients because of their improvement in and maintenance of symptoms of disease. This will also be of great benefit to medical and health professionals because as a result of symptom management and illness prevention, they can expect fewer hospitalizations and medical complications/development of new comorbid disorders (be it depression, diabetes, or stroke) due to lack of active participation in the health care process.
It appears as though explanatory style is an important component when trying to understand, predict, and enhance compliance with medical regimes. Because a negative explanatory style actually affects people physiologically in negative ways (e.g. keeping blood pressure at elevated levels despite attempts at intervention), it is important that health care officials are able to know who these people might be so that they can be given extra medical attention and counseling on how to change their explanatory style to be more optimistic. The CBI was effective at helping women to remember to take their medications regularly, and therefore this intervention provides hope/suggests a promising means by which people with pessimistic explanatory styles might be exposed to a new and healthier way of looking at the management of their disease. Such interventions might be tailored to other diseases and health complications in the near future to help facilitate compliance with any number and type of medical regimens.

Students of environmental conservation are well aware of the canon, "Think Globally, Act Locally," but to what extent is the global aspect actually realized? People should be more inclined to act locally more than globally, but what causes an individual to think globally? In other words, how far (literally) do our own environmental values span? Using and adding to research on the psychology of choice, and the effects of framing and protected values, this experiment tests the scope of people's environmental concerns. Here, I test how international versus national environmental issues effect people's choices.
Tversky and Kahneman (1981: 453) argue that rational decision-makers will prefer prospects that offer the "highest expected utility." However, this rationality may be thwarted when prospects are framed differentially, in terms of gains and losses. When prospects are framed in terms of gains, the chosen option is more likely to be risk averse. In contrast, when prospects are framed in terms of losses, the chosen option is more likely to be risk-taking. Tversky and Kahneman (1981) argue that people do not simply become irrational, but rather they make bounded decisions based on the most readily available, although limited, information.
Protected values may confound these framing effects. Protected values are firmly held ethical beliefs about one's duties and rights as a human being. Such values shape individual behavior because people are concerned not only with the consequences of the action, but also with the very nature of their own participation (Baron & Spranca, 1997). People with protected values cannot trade their personal values for others, and if they do, they are unhappy with their decision. Baron and Spranca (1997) suggest that protected values prohibit certain actions. Tanner and Medin (2004), in contrast, argue that protected values influence people to act, out of moral obligation; active moral obligation is stronger than moral prohibition of actions.
Tanner and Medin qualify their argument by suggesting that, at least in terms of environmental values and behavior, "prohibitions against action may be salient when the act can be seen as causing harm. In contrast, obligation to act may be more salient when the act can be seen as promoting something good" (in press: 4). Thus, there may be a relationship between the framing of the action prospects/options, such that harm (negativity) induces omission, while good actions (positivity) induces action. This argument holds, however, only when protected values are present and strong. Tanner and Medin suggest that when protected values are lacking, or even weakly present, tendencies are, as Tversky and Kahneman (1981) argue, malleable such that the way a prospect is framed may sway one's answer.
This experiment, then, will test an individual's reaction to different types of framed national and international environmental conservation situations. Several predictions are made, based on the above research.
1) If protected values do not exist, participant choices will be influenced by the way in which the scenario prospects are framed:
2) If protected values do exist, participant choices will be less influenced by the way in which the scenario prospects are framed:
This experiment was conducted through the use of e-mail surveys. The surveys were not anonymous, as respondents sent their responses to my e-mail address. I received 236 responses from people of various backgrounds and educational interests/career paths, and from across the United States.
To establish the presence/absence and intensity of protected values, participants were given a set of three national environmental statements and three international environmental statements. For each statement they chose one of three opinions:
Selecting option c is evidence of an environmental protected value. The statements were
as follows:
Immediately after selecting their opinions about the environmental statements, respondents proceeded to the environmental scenario section. Half of the participants (Group A) received scenarios with only negatively-framed prospects, and half of the participants (Group B) received scenarios with only positively-framed prospects. All participants received the same 3 international scenarios and 3 national scenarios. Both types had one scenario based on each of the following environmental issues: non charismatic endangered species, charismatic endangered species, and forest resources. To reduce bias, the actual survey did not denote the framing, scope, or categorical nature of the question (e.g. "international, forest resources, positive frame" will not be mentioned).
For this experiment, the framing (positive/negative), scope (national/international) and category (environmental issue) of each scenario are the independent variables, and the choice made by the respondent -- the effect of the framing, scope and category -- is the independent variable. This paper describes only the results of framing and scope, but addresses environmental issues in the discussion.
You were born and raised in the Midwest. It rains a lot in there, and most people have lush lawns and gardens that almost take care of themselves. Your fondest childhood memories are of you and your friends rolling down the grassy hill in your back yard, picking cherries and plums from your fruits trees, and smelling the roses and lilies that bloomed for months right outside your front door. Upon getting a new job, you move to Arizona, where the climate is a bit different from where you grew up. People have rocks instead of lawns and cacti instead of roses! You long for the beauty and comfort of a grassy landscape in front of your home, but you know that Arizona is very arid and grass is not a natural landscape there.
As a member of the city council, you must decide whether or not to begin constructing a new business plaza in town. The site slated for development, and you know that the businesses will bring in more employment and much needed revenue for the city.  However, is a remnant forest grove, with both historical and ecological value. The city is voting on which construction agency to hire.
After 35 years on the job, you have finally retired. You and your spouse are planning on moving to your mountain cabin to enjoy canoeing, bird-watching, and watching movies on your big screen television. Since you bought the cabin 10 years ago, however, the road leading up to your cabin is becoming more and more congested. Elk, moose, and grizzly bears are not only being hit by cars, but they are also losing their breeding and migratory habitat to new cabin and road construction. The county is considering have the inner-mountain roads removed so that forest habitat can re-grow. There are two plans from which the county is choosing from to solve this problem.
While on a kayaking trip in Baja California, Mexico, your tour group unexpectedly comes upon a school of endangered fish. The fish are endemic, sensitive to water fluctuation, and do not migrate out of the peninsula to spawn, or for any other reason, for that matter. The fish are small and barely visible from the top of the water, but your guide tells you that they are spawning all over the area. You and your group must decide which way to go in order to minimize disrupting the fish with the boats and paddles. Which path do you decide to take?
Although you have been diligently saving money for an upcoming backpacking trip through Europe, after watching a documentary on PBS about chimpanzees, you have begun looking for an organization to donate money to for the species' cause. You talk to a friend, who recommends 2 organizations, each with varying degrees of reputation.
You have just moved in to your new home and are shopping for new furniture. You find a store that is having a sale on beautiful wooden dining room set from Asia. The colors and style match your kitchenware perfectly. The price is far below what you want to spend, but you know that the wood is endangered and comes from threatened habitat, home to many endangered plants and animals.
After the scenarios are completed, participants will be asked to justify their decisions, through a single explanatory question: Why did you choose the option you chose?
Table 1 shows the percentage of respondents holding protected values which are national in scope, and those which are international in scope. The average percent of respondents which held at least one national protected value was 33%; the average for international protected values was 47%. This suggests that the scope of protected values can expand well beyond national borders. While not tested against actual behavior, it is likely that protected values are higher for international environmental issues simply because it is easier to "care" about issues which are remote from one's one life.
Table 2 shows the percentage of respondents, independent of protected values who selected option 1, 2, or 0 (zero signifies surveys where respondents refused to choose an option; this will be discussed in the justifications section). For 5 of the 6 positively framed scenarios, and 4 of the 6 negatively framed scenarios, respondents chose the predicted options, 1 (risk averse)and 2(risk taking), respectively.
In the analysis of the data, I categorized protected values into three groups:
For respondents with no or low protected values, results were the same for all three categories (TABLE 3):
As predicted, a framing effect was found for respondents with low or no protected values: for 4 out of 6 negatively framed scenarios, there were more respondents who chose option 2, the risk-taking choice. The framing effect was absent for scenario 3 (national) and scenario 5 (international). The framing effect was not stronger in national scenarios than in international scenarios, as was predicted.
Also as predicted, for 5 out of 6 positively framed scenarios, there were more respondents who chose option 1, the risk-averse choice. The framing effect was absent for scenario 3 (national). The framing affect was much stronger in the positively framed group than the negatively framed group, however, the framing effect was not stronger in national scenarios than in international scenarios, as was predicted
Table 4 shows that, as predicted, when protected values are high, there is no framing affect (although a slight effect is seen in scenario 2). In fact, scenarios 3, 4, 5, and 6 show an effect in the opposite direction; more people chose option 1.
For respondents with high national protected values, a framing effect is seen only in scenario 2 (which, interestingly, is a national scenario). (TABLE 5) Scenarios 1, 3, and 5 show a tendency to select option 1 rather than option 2, and scenarios 4 and 5 resulted in an equal selection of option 1 and 2.
For respondents with high international protected values, negatively framed scenarios did not produce a framing effect. In fact, in scenarios 3, 4, 5, and 6, respondents selected option 1. There was a weak framing effect towards option 2 in scenario 1 and 2. This illustrates that the presence of high international protected values severely decreases the framing effect for international, but not national, scenarios.
For total protected values, all positively framed scenarios tended to show the same framing effect; That is, option 1 was chosen more than option 2 (TABLE 7). Thus, protected values did not seem to lessen the framing effect for positively framed scenarios.
For international protected values, again there continued to be a framing effect for all scenarios; that is, option 1 was chosen more than option 2. For scenarios 2 and 6 the framing effect was even stronger; that is, a larger percentage of respondents with international protected values selected option 1 than the percentage of respondents without international protected values (TABLE 8). The table illustrates that the presence of high international protected values decreases the framing effect for both international and national scenarios.
For national protected values, positive scenarios 1, 4, and 5 showed the same framing effect; that is, option 1 was chosen more than option 2. For scenarios 2 and 3 an equal number of respondents chose option 1 and option 2. For scenario 6, more respondents chose option 2 than chose option 1 (TABLE 9).
Baron and Spranca (1997) suggest that people with protected values often will not even consider scenarios that conflict with their values. People can exhibit anger, bewilderment, and indignation, and subsequently choose neither of the options and (Tanner and Medin,1997). Table 10 shows that only a few (no more than 4% of respondents for any one scenario, positively or negatively framed; also shown in Table 2) refused to select an option. Protected values, however, were not always high for these individuals. This was particularly true for the respondents with positively framed surveys, where the majority of had low protected values (granted, this ranges from 2-4 individuals).
Respondents who refused to select an option to the scenarios stated one of two justifications: Either there was not enough information given in the scenario to justify selecting an option, or they simply could not justify selecting an option where there was a risk of ending the life of a living organism (the latter response was particularly true for the negatively framed options).
This paper did not address the three types of environmental scenarios; non charismatic endangered species, charismatic endangered species, and forest resources. There are, however, some potential predictions about how people choose to answer the scenarios based on the specific environmental issue.
The intensity of the framing effect will highest for charismatic endangered species scenarios, lower for non-charismatic endangered species scenarios, and lowest for forest remnant scenarios. Similar to analysis conducted on national/international protected values and how they correlate with national/international scenarios, I could run an analysis that tests whether or not specific protected values linearly match scenario choices. For example will a protected value about non-charismatic wildlife result in lower or absent framing effect for non-charismatic wildlife scenario, but not the other two options? What is the scope of an issue-specific environmental protected value?
Framing effects and deeply engrained protected values are rarely considered in environmental conservation education and research, yet acknowledging that people respond differently to the way in which a question is framed is obviously important. This research showed that positively framed scenarios were much more resilient to the presence of protected values than were negatively framed scenarios, and thus suggests that survey question design can be biased if questions are framed in particular ways. Specifically, if environmental surveys use close-ended questions where respondents are forced to choose from the given options, results can falsely illustrate overwhelming support or overwhelming opposition.

Bias based on sexual orientation and identity has been associated with a wide range of negative outcomes. For example, sexual minorities (i.e., individuals whose sexual behavior, psychological orientation, or identity is at least somewhat same-sex oriented) report significant levels of psychological distress in response to sexual identity-based hate crimes as well as heterosexist and homophobic comments (Szymanski, 2005). Experimental evidence suggests that even ambient heterosexist comments and actions -- not targeted directly at the observer but nonetheless occurring in his or her surrounding environment -- causes stress to sexual minority individuals (Burn, Kadlec, & Rexer, 2005; Konik, 2005; Silverschanz, 2007). And it has been proposed that all people, regardless of identity or orientation, are affected negatively by ambient prejudice such as sexism, heterosexism, and homophobia (Cortina, Magley, Williams, & Langout, 2001; Franck, 2002; Silverschanz, 2007).
There are numerous ways to measure attitudes towards sexual minorities, including scales of internalized homophobia (sexual minorities' shame and self-hatred based on negative societal messages about being non-heterosexual; e.g., Martin & Dean, 1988, as cited in Peterson & Gerrity, 2005) and measures of people's beliefs and attitudes towards sexual minorities more generally (e.g., Herek, 1994; Morrison & Morrison, 2002; Morrison, Parriag, & Morrison, 1999; Raja & Stokes, 1998; Steffens, 2005). However, explicit prejudicial attitudes may not be the only contributors to discriminatory behaviors and bias. More subtle underlying attitudes and beliefs about the nature of sexuality and what constitutes a normal and healthy adult relationship may also affect such outcomes. One approach to studying these underlying issues is to examine the effects of normative societal expectations about sexual behavior and identities. This area of study may be defined as heteronormativity, a construct that is often cited in gender studies as an important contributor to heterosexism, homophobia, and sexism (e.g., Blasius, 2000; Grace, 1999; Lancaster, 2003; Phelan, 2001, all cited in Kitzinger, 2005; also see Tee & Hegarty, 2006).
Heteronormativity has been defined as enforced compliance with culturally determined heterosexual roles (Nielsen, Walden, & Kunkel, 2000), and assumptions about heterosexuality as "natural" or "normal" (Kitzinger, 2005). Gender is closely related and often intertwined with such definitions, for normative heterosexuality cannot exist without rigid, binary expectations of behavior based on gender (e.g., Jackson, 2006). For example, heteronormativity has a circular relationship with hegemonic masculinity, both creating and resulting from the strict boundaries delimiting acceptable male behavior (e.g., Jones, 2006; Martino, 2000).
Jackson (2006, p. 114) explains that heteronormativity is "mobilized and reproduced" in ordinary, everyday social discourse and behavior, and Yep (2003, p. 13) proposes that it is caused by an "anxious" urge to protect illusory beliefs that heterosexuality is natural, normal, and inevitable. Rubin (1975), Rich (1980), and Jackson (1999), previously explored the "obligatory...compulsory...(and) compulsive" pressures toward heterosexuality (all cited in Yep, p. 18). Yep builds on this work to elucidate the violence that heteronormativity inflicts on women (by requiring that they serve men in marriage and motherhood), men (by defining rigid expectations of hegemonic masculinity), sexual minorities (by defining them as "other" and thus not fully human), and individuals who experience multiple forms of prejudice and marginalization due to the intersections of racial, ethnic, gender, sexual, and other identities. Consistent with Yep's portrayal of heteronormative violence, Lind (2004) points out that sexual minorities living in poverty are especially disenfranchised; they have limited access to resources, and the social services that would otherwise be available to heterosexually-headed households are denied to them due to definitions of marriage and family in welfare law.
Another negative consequence of social norms for sexual minorities is repeatedly confronting assumptions about heterosexuality, which results in having to make daily decisions about coming out or "passing," both of which involve particular stressors (Land & Kitzinger, 2005). Similarly, at social functions such as weddings, where the social capital of heterosexuality is celebrated and revered, sexual minorities are either invisible or "othered" (Oswald, 2000). In two recent studies (Harwood, 1998; Hylton, 2005), lesbian social work students reported that their colleagues and instructors assumed they were heterosexual unless they explicitly stated otherwise, that sexual minority concerns were not given as much importance as other aspects of social justice, and that privileging of and assumptions about heterosexuality led to feelings of isolation and invisibility among these lesbian students. In another qualitative study, Nielsen, Walden, & Kunkel (2000) explained that male undergraduate students who purposefully violated traditional gender norms encountered homophobic jokes and protestations by interlocutors of their own heterosexuality, while female students transgressing normative gender roles received unsolicited advice about adhering to femininity if they hoped to attract a mate. As construed by Yep (2003), and demonstrated by numerous qualitative investigations, the "violence" of heteronormativity is perpetuated on several levels: institutional, interpersonal, and even intrapsychic (i.e., the self-hatred of internalized homophobia in sexual minorities).
Although heteronormativity has not been explicitly examined in quantitative social science research, studies have examined closely related constructs. For instance, authoritarianism is directly associated with support of traditional, hierarchical power structures that demand rigid adherence to traditional gender roles (Duncan, Peterson, & Winter, 1997; Whitley & Ægisdottir, 2000). Authoritarianism has also been specifically linked to negative attitudes towards sexual minorities (Haddock, Zanna, and Esses, 1993, as cited in Ducnan, Peterson, & Winter, 1997; Tee & Hegarty, 2006). In turn, negative attitudes towards sexual minorities have also correlated with lower levels of openness to experience (Cullen, Wright, & Alessandri, 2002), and inflexible beliefs about fundamental, categorical differences between people based on sexual identity or orientation (Hegarty & Pratto, 2001).
In sum, heteronormative attitudes and beliefs define the boundaries of normative sexual behavior (e.g., people should partner with others of the opposite sex), and relate to proscriptions against behaviors and feelings that violate these norms. In addition, heteronormativity is theorized to rely on underlying assumptions about binary, essentialist beliefs about sex and gender. However, current literature includes neither a measure of the construct of heteronormativity, nor a quantitative investigation of the relationships among heteronormative attitudes, attitudes towards sexual minorities, and other relevant personality constructs. The aim of this study was to develop a measure of heteronormativity, the Heteronormative Attitudes and Beliefs Scale (HABS), and to examine relationships among heteronormativity, authoritarianism, and attitudes towards lesbians and gays. For the purposes of this study, heteronormativity will be defined as beliefs about (1) sex and gender as binary and biologically determined and (2) the assumed normality of sexual relationships between males/men and females/women.
I hypothesized that the HABS would be comprised of two factors, which would map onto the two components of heteronormativity described above (binary/biologically determined sex and gender, and normative behavioral expectations). I further hypothesized that scores on this new measure would correlate significantly with authoritarian attitudes and prejudicial attitudes towards lesbians and gays.
Eighty-four undergraduate students participated in this study, including 49 students from an introductory-level abnormal psychology course and 35 from an upper-level psychology course on gender and sexual identity (mean age = 20, range = 18-22 years). Approximately ¼ of the participants (24%) were male, ¾ were female, and none of the participants identified as transgender. In addition, 11% (n = 10) of the participants were sexual minorities and 21% (n = 18) identified as racial or ethnic minorities. Minority group categorizations were based on open-ended questions about race/ethnicity ("How would you describe your racial or ethnic identity?") and sexual orientation ("How would you describe your sexual orientation?"). Racial and ethnic minority participants included students identifying as Asian, Indian, Middle Eastern, or Chinese (n = 9); Latino/a, Hispanic, or Puerto Rican (n = 5); African-American or Black (n = 3); and Native American (n = 1). Sexual minority identity responses included "mostly straight" (n = 2); questioning, open, undefined, or bisexual (n = 6); and gay (n = 2). In addition, 9 students identified as a "straight ally" or "open heterosexual" and were categorized as heterosexual.
The Heteronormative Attitudes and Beliefs Scale (HABS) was developed from a set of 38 items which were selected, adapted, or designed to load on two hypothesized factors: (1) essentialized and binary beliefs about gender and sex and (2) normative behavioral expectations for men and women in romantic or sexual relationships (see Table 1 for items). Several items pertaining to binary and essentialized beliefs about gender and sex were adapted from Tee & Hegarty (2006). Approximately ½ of the items were positively worded (i.e., higher levels of agreement = higher levels of heteronormativity) and the remaining items were negatively worded (i.e., higher levels of agreement = lower levels of heteronormativity). All items used a 7-point Likert scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. Following the wording in Altemeyer's (1998) measure of RWA, the midpoint response for each item was "exactly neutral."
Two additional measures were administered in order to establish the validity of the HABS. First, RWA was measured using a 20-item version of Altemeyer's (1998) well-established questionnaire. In Christopher and Mull's (2006) study, Chronbach's alpha for this measure was .95, and D.G. Winter (personal communication, February 23rd, 2007) reported observing alphas well over .90 across multiple studies. Altemeyer's previous versions of this measure have also demonstrated excellent reliability and validity (see Altemeyer, 1988 and 1996). Following Duncan, Peterson, and Winter (1997), participants rated each item using a 7-point scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. A standardized mean composite score was computed to assess overall RWA tendencies. Second, a 10-item version of Herek's (1994) Attitudes Towards Lesbians and Gays (ATLG) was used to measure heterosexist prejudice directed towards lesbians and gay men. The ATLG limits its evaluation of sexual minorities to two discrete groups (lesbians and gay men), thus neglecting to directly measure attitudes about other sexual minorities, such as bisexuals. However, this measure is well-established in the literature as accurately predicting heterosexist attitudes and behaviors (e.g., Stover & Morera, 2007). Standardized mean composite scores were calculated to assess both attitudes towards lesbians (ATL) and attitudes towards gay men (ATG).
Undergraduate students in the two psychology courses were asked during class time to volunteer for this study. Willing participants stayed to complete the survey. Negatively-worded items on each measure were reverse-scored before calculating scale reliabilities, and these scores were standardized before computing the mean scores that were used in correlational analyses, group comparisons, and regressions.
A Varimax rotated factor analysis of the 38 items in Table 1 revealed 2 factors with Eigenvalues of 9.42 and 5.86, accounting respectively for 24.79% and 15.42% of the variance (the scree plot suggested a 2-factor solution). All items with factor loadings of at least .5 (absolute value) were considered for inclusion in the final scale; the items with the highest loadings on one factor and relatively lowest loadings on the other factor were retained in the analyses that follow. This resulted in a 16-item measure of heteronormativity, comprised of two scales with 8 items each, with balanced negative/positive wording. The scales, labeled Binary Gender and Normative Behavior, reflected the two predicted components of heteronormativity. Chronbach's alpha for the Binary Gender Scale was α = .92, and reliability for the Normative Behavior Scales was α = .78. Sample items loading on the two scales included the following:
As predicted, the HABS correlated significantly with RWA, attitudes towards lesbians, and attitudes towards gay men (see Table 2). This was true for both the Binary Gender sub-scale as well as the Normative Behavior sub-scale.
These findings reveal preliminary support for the validity and reliability of the HABS. Because heteronormative attitudes are theorized as contributing directly to prejudicial attitudes towards lesbians and gays, it was hypothesized that these two measures would correlate significantly. And because RWA and attitudes towards lesbians and gays have been highly correlated in previous studies, it was hypothesized that RWA and heteronormativity would also be highly correlated. Results supporting these hypotheses suggest that the HABS measure and its two subscales have adequate concurrent validity with these closely related constructs. Discriminant validity was not directly tested in this study, and I need to consult with someone more knowledgeable about statistics in order to discern whether the regression analyses reported above suggest that the HABS measure is at least somewhat orthogonal to the constructs of RWA and attitudes toward sexual minorities.
Caution is warranted in the interpretation of group differences in heteronormativity among participants of this study. On the one hand, sample sizes are likely too small to detect significant group differences by gender and sexual minority status. On the other hand, significant group differences observed by racial and ethnic minority status are based on small numbers of people who do not likely represent the diversity of opinions and perspectives within racial and ethnic minority groups, and prediction of outcomes by racial and ethnic minority status becomes nonsignificant when controlling for age and course enrollment. In addition, no intra-group analyses for racial and ethnic minority groups (i.e., African Americans, Latino/as), sexual minority status, or gender were possible due to the small within-cell sample sizes. For these reasons, neither the significant differences by racial/ethnic minority status and sexual minority status, nor the lack of significant differences found when comparing scores by gender, are discussed here.
This study lays a foundation for future investigations of heteronormative attitudes and behaviors using the HABS. Several limitations that could be addressed in subsequent studies are described here. For example, neither religion nor political orientation were measured in this study, and a greater diversity of demographics such as race, ethnicity, age, and education level would help in determining whether the properties observed in this study are generalizable to particular populations. In addition, in order to make sense of any group differences by sexual, racial, or ethnic minority status, these populations should be oversampled to allow for intra-group as well as inter-group analyses.
Discriminant validity was not explored in this study and could be examined in the future by investigating intercorrelations among HABS scores, RWA, and constructs expected to relate to RWA but not necessarily to heteronormative attitudes. For example, attitudes about the natural environment correlate significantly with RWA (e.g., Schultz & Stone, 1994) but would be expected to be somewhat orthogonal to attitudes about sexuality. Future studies could also assess test-retest reliability to determine the stability of individuals' heteronormative attitudes and beliefs as well as the affects of potential interventions aimed at reducing heteronormative assumptions.
During the Winter 2008 semester, I plan to replicate the study described in this paper in order to gain a better understanding of the properties of this new measure. Study participants will be recruited from undergraduate courses, hopefully from courses in different departments such as Women's Studies, Sociology, and Psychology.
In addition to pursuing a better understanding of heteronormativity and the statistical properties of the HABS, future research could use this measure to examine potential causes and consequences of heteronormative attitudes and beliefs. For example, understanding how heteronormativity and sexual orientation relate to one another may help us to make sense of mental health outcomes for lesbians, gay men, bisexual and transgender women and men, and even heterosexuals who subtly or blatantly transgress the rigid expectations that characterize a heteronormative society.
In my dissertation study, I am using the HABS in my investigation of two main research questions. First, how do sexual orientation and gender relate to personality constructs such as right-wing authoritarianism (RWA), tolerance of ambiguity, openness to experience, and heteronormative attitudes and beliefs? And second, how do tolerance of ambiguity, openness to experience, RWA, and heteronormative attitudes and beliefs relate to psychological well-being? With respect to the second question, my dissertation study is also investigating whether sexual orientation (as defined by psychological orientation, behavioral orientation, and self-defined identity) predicts different relationships among the variables. I will also assess fluidity, or the degree to which psychological, behavioral, and identity aspects of sexuality vary, and outness, or the extent to which individuals disclose these three aspects of sexuality to others. Because research participants' understandings of the concepts under investigation may vary, I will ask participants to provide the labels and terms they use to define and describe their experiences and identities in addition to asking closed-ended questions about demographics and sexual orientation. After I complete the data collection phase of this project, the following relevant hypotheses will be tested:
As described above, the problems and consequences of heteronormative attitudes are many; normative expectations of gender and sexual experiences likely affect all those who transgress such norms. And arguably few, if any, individuals always satisfy all of the normative expectations of gender and sexuality. Developing this measure is a preliminary step towards a better understanding of the significance of heteronormativity in our daily lives. And with increased understanding, we may yet, as Yep (2003) proposes, be able to challenge the boundaries of (hetero)sexuality -- to undermine some of the ways in which heterosexuality is created and maintained, to destabilize some of the ways in which gender hierarchies uphold heterosexuality, and to understand sexuality as only one layer in our complex and intersecting identities.

The purpose of this study is to explore a variety of potential causes of suicide (with the pre-existing data set that is presently available). Suicide is an action that results in death, and it is therefore important to understand its causes so that future occurrences can potentially be reduced. From this study, I hope to answer the following research question: Are individual or social variables the primary predicators of suicide rates? Drawing on the functionalist tradition that relies on social structure to explain individual behavior, I hypothesize that social variables (marital status, national citizenship, and religious affiliation) are better predictors of suicide than individual variables (race, alcoholism, and insanity). Through this research, I hope to contradict those who support biological, psychological, and behavioral explanations as predictors of suicide.
Current theorists that attempt to explain the factors that contribute to the existence of suicide differ primarily in terms of their explanations regarding the impact of social institutions on individual behavior. Functionalists and conflict theorists often argue that social structures are the primary determinants of individual characteristics and behavior, while theorists who emphasize agency focus on the way in which individuals give meaning to the world that they inhabit. Therefore, the discussion of suicidal determinants is often grounded in the broad theoretical debate between the role of agency and social structure.
Directly related to these opposing theoretical frameworks used to explain the causes of individual action are the current explanations of the act of suicide itself. Weishaar and Beck (1992) and Baumeister (1990) suggest that suicide is often used as a mechanism to cope with hopelessness, the feeling of persistent failure, frequently visible among older adults (though not a feeling felt exclusively by this group). Frankl (1984, 1971) and Weisman (1991) in contrast argue more as theorists who emphasize social structure and its impact on individual behavior by supporting the statement that, "an absence of meaning recognition can promote suicide" (Frankl 1984, 1971). He suggests that meaning in life is, "generally discovered in creative pursuits, in life's experiences and relationships, and in attitudes taken toward both positive life experiences and the 'tragic triad' of pain/suffering, guilt, and death." One's relationships and ability to positively deal with the "tragic triad" are related to the degree to which one is integrated into social institutions and networks. The failure to adequately integrate oneself in society can therefore contribute to one's lack of meaning in life, and contribute to one's decision to take one's own life.
As complex phenomena, the causes of suicide can be explained through a variety of perspectives including brain characteristics, genetics, psychological traits, and social forces, in addition to any combination of these. Those who take a more sociological stance argue that suicide results both from a lack of social integration (anomic suicide), and sometimes from too much social integration (resulting in altruistic suicide). From this perspective, the extent to which one is engaged in societal institutions is the primary determinant of suicidal behavior. It is true that, "people suffering from diagnosable mental illnesses complete about 90 percent of all suicides," (Pseudo Lit. 2 page 3) which some argue supports theories that individual genetic predispositions for certain psychological disorders and depression are the primary causes of suicide. Sociological theorists in contrast may use this same statistic to argue that high suicide rates among the mentally ill occur simply because society has failed to adequately integrate this group of people into social institutions, causing these individuals to feel a sense of normlessness.
Though the current research on the causes of suicide is broad, it remains relatively inconclusive. Previous studies have focused predominantly on biological, psychological, and behavioral variables, and have neglected to conduct comprehensive scientific research on social factors as significant predictors of suicide. Because of this, I will conduct a study that involves the secondary data analysis of comprehensive pre-existing data, in an effort to explain the impact of individual and social variables as potential determinants of suicide.
The data used in this study are secondary data that are being reanalyzed for the purposes of this research. The sources of this data are tables A and B on handout number one, tables C and D on handout number two, and tables E and F on handout number three. Table A examines the relationship between race (which for the purposes of this study is classified as a biological variable) and suicide. Table B examines the relationship between insanity, a psychological variable, and suicide. Table C examines the relationship between alcoholism, a behavioral variable, and suicide. And, tables D, E, and F examine the relationships between marital status, national citizenship, and religion, all social variables, and suicide respectively. A variety of statistical procedures will be used to analyze this data (looking for simple correlations), in an attempt to answer this studies' primary research question.
In table A, the relationship between race, the independent variable, and suicide rates, the dependent variable, is shown. The data shows a comparison in the rates of suicide (number of suicides per one million people) among Austrian provinces with different German population sizes. According to table A below, race (as measured by the number of Germans in a province) does not seem to be correlated with rates of suicide. This is because in the province with the smallest German minority the suicide rate has an average of 86, the province with the important German minority has an average suicide rate of 140, the province that has a majority of Germans has an average suicide rate of 125, and the purely German province has an average suicide rate of 106. If race were correlated with suicide rates one would expect suicide rates to either consistently increase or consistently decrease as the proportion of Germans in a given province declined.
In sections A and B of table B, the relationship between insanity, the independent variable, and suicide rates, the dependent variable, is shown. In part A of table B, the data shows a comparison between the rank order of nine countries' insanity rates (number of insane per 100,000 inhabitants) and the rank order of their respective suicide rates (number of suicides per 1,000,000 inhabitants). The data show (through the randomness of section A of table B) that there is no correlation between the number of insane in a particular country and the number of suicides that occur in a particular country. Section B of table B shows that there is no correlation between average suicide rates and the number of insane in the four given regions as well. If insanity were correlated with suicide in section B of table B, one would expect average suicide rates to either consistently increase or decrease as insanity rates declined.
In table C, the relationship between alcohol consumption, the independent variable, and average suicide rates, the dependent variable, is shown for different countries and regions in Germany. The data show that there is no correlation between a regions' per capita alcohol consumption and average suicide rates.
In the first section of table D, the relationship between marital status, the independent variable, and suicide rates, the dependent variable, are shown for each sex at seven different age groups. For both men and women, the data show that marital status is correlated with suicide rates because in every age group except one (ages 16-25 for men), the numbers of non-married/widowed who commit suicide are higher than the numbers of married who commit suicide. The second section of table D shows the degree to which suicides of unmarried men and women of the same age group are higher when compared to those of the married. One significant result is that non-married men above 75 are 37 times more likely to commit suicide when compared to their married counterparts, though non-married women in this same age group are only 4.5 times more likely to commit suicide when compared to their married counterparts. So, in the oldest age group, non-married men are much more likely to commit suicide than non-married women (both in relation to their married counterparts).
In table E, the relationship between (European) country, the independent variable, and suicide rates, the dependent variable, is shown. The data show that suicide rates (measured as the number of suicides per million inhabitants) remain relatively constant overtime within each of the eleven European countries shown. But, there is quite a bit of variation in suicide rates between countries, so country does seem to be correlated with suicide rates.
In table F, the relationship between religion, the independent variable, and suicide rates, the dependent variable, is shown for different countries. The data show that for all countries included, Protestants have higher suicide rates when compared to both Catholics and Jews. Therefore, religious affiliation does seem to be a good predictor of suicide rates.
Overall, the results show that the societal variables of marital status, national citizenship, and religious affiliation are all good predictors of suicide rates. The results also suggest that the more individual variables of race, alcoholism, and insanity are not good predictors of suicide rates. These findings are significant because they show that even a seemingly personal decision, such as committing suicide, is not determined by individual characteristics (race, alcoholism, and insanity), but rather by social institutions.
As described in the results section, table D indicates that marital status is correlated with suicide rates. The general trend is that both men and women who are married have significantly lower rates of suicide when compared to their unmarried counterparts. Those who are married may have lower suicide rates because the institution of marriage may provide a social support system that helps one satisfy certain goals, traditions, norms, and values. It is the integration in the social institution of marriage that may be the determining factor in whether or not one commits suicide in a time of crisis.
Despite this general trend, there is one instance where married individuals have higher suicide rates than their unmarried counterparts. Among men aged 16-25, the rate of suicide for married men is 10.51, while the rate of suicide for unmarried men is 5.69. This exception suggests that for young men (those aged 16-25), marriage may constrain and be a burden to one who may otherwise be experiencing the freedom that often comes with youth. Married men between the ages of 16-25 may therefore feel deprived of their single years, which may lead to depression, and possibly suicide. Table D also indicates that in the oldest age group (above 75), unmarried men are much more likely to commit suicide then unmarried women (both in relation to their married counterparts). It may be that men who live over 75 feel out of place in society where men typically die much earlier than women. Though married men over 75 encounter a similar situation, the marital institution may provide the social support to mitigate the negative affects of living so long (for men). Similarly, unmarried women over 75 are not an anomaly, which may be why they are much less likely to commit suicide (at least in relation to men in the same position).
The empirical evidence from table E suggests that suicide rates remain relatively stable within countries overtime, but between countries there is significant variance, indicating that national citizenship is related to suicide rates. Suicide rates within countries may remain relatively stable overtime due to the presence of distinct national cultures that promote or prohibit certain behaviors, values, norms, and beliefs. Suicide rates between countries may vary depending on the content of a particular countries' national culture. Saxony and Denmark consistently have the highest rates of suicide, which indicates that there is something about being a citizen of these two nations that predisposes one as more likely to commit suicide when compared to one from any of the other nine countries included in this study. I argue that those countries with high suicide rates have national cultures that promote individualism more, leading citizens of these countries to be more independently motivated, and less integrated into society.
As indicated in the results section of this paper, religion also seems to be a good predictor of suicide rates. The evidence suggests that Protestants have higher suicide rates when compared to both Catholics and Jews. I argue that this is because Catholics and Jews tend to live in more tight knit communities where traditional rituals impose many restrictions on the lives of inhabitants. With close knit communities and restrictions comes an intense sense of social support, something that the evidence suggests Catholics and Jews experience more than Protestants. The presence of social support networks in Catholic and Jewish communities may explain why these religious groups experience lower suicide rates among their people.
The findings in this study relate back to the broader theoretical debate surrounding the causes of suicide by reinforcing the idea that social structure, as opposed to agency, affects individual behavior most. Though this study allows one to conclude that it is social variables that predict the occurrence of suicide rather than individual variables, this study does have some limitations. This study relies on the premise that correlation equates to causation, which is scientifically unreliable to assume. Secondly, the way in which race is defined in this study is somewhat problematic. Race does not simply encompass the proportion of Germans within a given population, but is a much more complex concept, that in a better study would have been operationalized in a more complex way.
Given the data presently available to conduct this study, the data seem to show relatively conclusive results, providing further support for our hypothesis.

Suicide is the third leading cause of death for youth aged 10 to 24 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2002). Women of all ages are three times as likely to attempt suicide in their lives as are men (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2004). The U.S. Centers for Disease Control list family and community support as one of the key mechanisms for preventing suicide among those at risk (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2004). Considering the above statistics and the federal government's attention to collecting them and offering suicide-prevention advice, we can see that suicide has been recognized as a social problem to which the government has allocated public funds to prevent. The CDC goes on to recommend, however, that clinical care for mental and substance abuse disorders is also key to preventing suicide, thus suggesting that individual psychological factors can be at fault. In this paper, I explore the relationship between suicide and individual versus social factors. Specifically, I ask whether micro level psychological factors or macro level societal factors are more significant determinants of whether a person will commit suicide. I hypothesize that social conditions, not psychological status, are more predictive of an individual's decision to take his own life. Such research is valuable and relevant as part of a larger effort to determine what causes people to take their own lives and an attempt to mediate those provoking factors.
Because of the grave social and painful individual implications of suicide, it has been the subject of much study among scholars. Many scholars believe that a persistent feeling of hopelessness is the driving force behind suicide in adults. They define hopelessness more specifically than its colloquial usage. Minkoff, in his work, describes it as, a feeling that "nothing will turn out right, nothing will succeed, important goals are unattainable, and worst problems will never be solved" (Handout, 2005). Weishaar and Beck also focus on the role of hopelessness in suicide. Many other scholars, including Beck, Pearson, Brown, Conaghan, Davidson, Heisel, Hill, and Uncapher further emphasize the role of hopelessness in causing suicide among specific populations, such as psychiatric patients and the elderly.
Related to theories centering on hopelessness is what are called the "escape theory" and the "meaning-centered approach". Both of these theoretical approaches discuss a particular manifestation of hopelessness as center to suicidality. Escape theorists such as Baumeister and Hewitt posit that suicidal behavior results when a person perceives herself as failing or not meeting perfectionist goals. This state of negative self-awareness leads to "cognitive deconstruction" (Handout, 2005) in which the person's judgment and inhibition falters and they choose suicide to escape their painful state of disappointment and self-perceived failure. The meaning-centered approach similarly focuses on an individual's perception of her life. Frankl and Linehan in particular propose that a person's will to live depends on their ability to find meaning in new life events. Those who can find meaning even in negative events or suffering are thus less prone to suicide.
The medical profession has even gotten involved in the debate. Some scientific research indicates that predisposition to suicide may be a genetically inherited trait. However, psychiatrists and psychologists, such Americans Karl Menninger and Edwin Schneidman, still tend to focus on the role of hopelessness and inability to see solutions to problems as driving factors behind suicide (Handout, 2005).
All of the above literature focuses on traits of individuals that may cause suicide. There, however, a substantial body of literature that claims the individual factors causing suicide are negligible when compared to the social forces influencing an individual's perceptions and actions. To understand such a seemingly counterintuitive position, we must first review the sociological literature on individual agency and social structure.
Two basic schools of thought dominate the structuralist camp. Many sociologists, including prominent scholars Emile Durkheim and Karl Marx, argue that social structures are so powerful that they completely control an individual, and leave no room for individual's actions or characteristics to determine her life. More recently, Berger and Luckmann have argued that Durkheim and Marx's ideal is too restrictive and that, in the beginning, individuals have agency in giving meaning to the world they see around them. After this first act of free choice, however, these meaning become institutionalized and then form the social structure which goes on to limit the future agency of the individual. In discussing suicide, structural sociologists would look at the influence of social institutions and practices on an individual's decision to commit suicide.
On the other side of the coin are sociologists who believe that individuals have considerable power in shaping their world and perceptions. These scholars, known as symbolic-interactionists, do not ignore the influence of society. They recognize the power of social forces such as stigma, situation, and peer groups and the limitations placed by society on individuals. They do believe, however, that individuals retain some agency and ability to effect change in their part of the world. Proponents of this theory include George Herbert Mead and others of the Chicago school.
At this point, I will leave my discussion of previous literature and turn to my own research. Later, in the discussion section, I will support my conclusions by citing and integrating the above scholarship to provide a complete picture of the driving forces behind tendency toward suicidal behavior.
The data set I work with has been compiled by examining public census records throughout the German provinces and in surrounding European countries in the 1880s. This data set is very similar to that used by Emile Durkheim in his landmark study on suicide in Europe. My dependent variable is number of suicides per a given number of inhabitants as indicated in the results tables. My independent variables are: race, insanity, alcoholism, marital status, country of residence, and religion. I will analyze the relationship between each of the independent variables and the dependent variable by listing the average results and visually comparing these averages. I choose to use publicly available data because it is most cost efficient while at the same time most complete because it was collected by an official government agency with the time and resources to create a comprehensive data set.
Analyzing Durkheim's results we can see many interesting trends. In his comparison of suicide and race we see little correlation between the two. Purely German provinces and provinces with a small German population had approximately the same difference in suicides per million as did purely German provinces and majority German provinces. The suicide rate per million increased slowly for purely German, majority German, and important German minority provinces, but then dropped dramatically for provinces with a small German minority. There does not seem to be a correlation between race and suicide rates.
In his comparison of number of insane per 100,000 and average suicides per million inhabitants, there does not appear to be a correlation either. As the number of insane goes down incrementally from 215 to 84, the average suicides increase on the whole from 107 to 153.
Similarly, looking at consumption of alcohol in liters per capita and average suicides per million inhabitants, we see that suicides hover around 200 per million for inhabitants who consumed between 7.2 and 13 liters of alcohol in 1884-1886, then shoot up to 234 suicides for those who consumed 4.5 to 6.4 liters between 1884-1886, then fall again to 147 for those who consumed 4 or less. From a cursory non-scientific examination I see no correlation between the number of liters of alcohol consumed per capita between 1884 and 1886, and the average suicides per million inhabitants.
Examining the data concerning marital status and rates of suicide, however, we can see a much stronger correlation. Single men aged 16 to 65 are, on average, 3.16 times as likely to commit suicide as unmarried men the same age. This shoots up to eleven times as likely for men aged 66 to 75, and thirty-seven times more likely for men over 75. Women aged 16 to 65 are approximately 2.7 as likely to commit suicide as unmarried women the same age, while women 66 to 75 are 11.12 times as likely to do so. Clearly, these rates indicate that unmarried people face a substantially increased risk of suicide, usually on the magnitude of three times but sometimes as high as thirty-seven times.
An analysis of the suicide rates per million inhabitants of different European countries yields a similarly consistent result. Over a twelve year period in a survey of eleven countries, no country ever moved more than two rank positions away from its original rank. For example, Italy remained the country with the lowest number of suicides during the entire twelve year period, while Denmark and Saxony always held their positions as the those country with the top two suicide rates. Each country in the survey basically ranked the same in terms of number of suicides in comparison with the others throughout all of the years examined. This indicates some correlation between citizenship and tendency toward suicidal behavior.
Finally, we see a notable correlation between the average number of suicides in a given period in Austria, Prussia, Baden, Bavaria, and Wurttemberg. Protestants averaged 171 suicides per million persons in those regions, while Jews averaged 111 and Catholics only 96. The relatively large discrepancy in these numbers indicates some sort of relationship between religion and suicidal behavior.
These results demonstrate that macro level social factors are better predictors of suicidal behavior than individual forces. That is, a person's nationality/race, presence of insanity, and addiction to alcohol can all be considered characteristics inherent to a person-characteristics that are inseparable from her as a human being. Contrarily, marital status, country of residency, and religion are social factors-conferred by social institutions or social designations, and not an inborn trait of a person. This confirms Emile Durkheim's conclusion that individuals are less likely to commit suicide when they feel a part of a cohesive group and have strong social bonds, such as when they are part of a married couple, part of a strong, patriotic nation, or part of a community-oriented religion such as Catholicism or Judaism. The results of Durkheim's work suggest a structure-centered, not agency-centered, model of understanding individuals and suicide. That is, he recognizes the power of social and inter-personal circumstances in determining an individual's behavior, even suicide, and gives substantially less weight to personal characteristics. His research demonstrates that macro-level factors are more influential in determining behavior than are traits we consider to be an individual's active choice or predilection.
This can be linked with other research that emphasizes the role of feelings of hopelessness in suicide, as ability to interact with others and have continuing new life events maintains higher levels of hopefulness and life-meaning. Members of communities can take advantage of the social bonds and group support discovered by Durkheim to dispel hopelessness, lack of purpose, and feelings of failure by maintaining positive interaction with others.
This study should be extended, even only on the variables already used, to contemporary times. Given the increase in religions in Europe as well as the more public existence of atheists and agnostics, one could study not only the effects of impersonal, Protestant v. community-based, Catholic or Jewish religions, but the effect of religion (Christian, Judaic, and Muslim) versus no religion. Suicide and insanity could be extended to study suicide rates and those who receive mental health services and those who don't. Tagging onto the debate over information technology, another interesting avenue would be to study rates of suicide among those who frequently use computers and the internet versus those who do not. Given the high rates of suicide among youth mentioned in the introduction of this paper itself, extending the study to suicide rates of youths from different socioeconomic, cultural, and familial situations would be a very interesting and relevant application of the survey. Government and non-profit sponsored programs geared at increasing social integration may be a particularly good area for expansion. In addition to providing individual psychological counseling services and identifying practical ways to physically protect suicidal patients, these programs can develop partnerships with community organizations. Such collaboration can provide a meaningful way for individuals receiving individualized services for suicidality to be linked with a organization that can facilitate positive social and community-building experiences. The data analyzed above clearly indicates the importance of feelings of social integration and belonging in decisions to commit suicide. Connection of both public and private sector suicide counseling and prevention services with neighborhood-based, socially-oriented community organizations may be the critical link in creating an expanded, effective safety net for citizens vulnerable to suicidal behavior.
Clearly, much work remains to be done in the field of suicidality. A multitude of social variables intersect to determine one's susceptibility to suicide. Continuing down the road of individualized psychological services is not sufficient to stem the problem as we now confront it. Taking a new direction in which social services recognize the feelings of loneliness, alienation, and lack of social integration underlying suicide may provide new avenues for early identification of suicidal tendencies and the prevention of suicidal behavior in citizens of all ages and social groups.

Abortion is a very controversial topic for conversation today -- in the 21st century -- where it has achieved mainstream visibility in the political sphere. The controversy often revolves around opposing claims of rights and polarized feelings of support for the baby's right to life and thus opposition to abortion or support for the choice of the woman carrying the baby and thus support for abortion. More than a medical option (though not a consistently legal medical option across the States), abortion is an issue involving widespread disagreement over its appropriate level of legislation. Pro-life activists often argue that because it involves the question of life, abortion is a moral issue. In 2004, many voters admitted this issue was singularly used to direct their choice for President of the United States. These voters were subsequently classified as moral voters.
So this begs the question: how far is morality interconnected with abortion? Are these two concepts causally related? In my study, I will be examining whether or not religious attitudes affect personal feelings on abortion. My research question is: Are religious people more likely to be against abortion than non-religious people. My hypothesis is that religious people are more against abortion (pro-life) than non-religious people. I believe religious people view abortion as a cruel and negative thing because they think it is taking the life of a baby whereas non-religious people tend to think of abortion not in terms of the life of the baby but in terms of the mother carrying the baby. They believe abortion is a necessary freedom of choice.
I am interested in how individual opinions of abortion are affected by religious views, so my unit of analysis will be individuals. The two concepts I am studying are religiosity and feelings on abortion. Religious people are my main interest group, so non-religious people are my comparison group. My independent variable is the level of religiosity of my unit (individuals) studied, and feelings on abortion is my dependent variable. My ideal study population would be a representative population of all United States citizens, with a wide distribution of gender, age, class, region, and race. My actual study population is University of Michigan students because they are who I have access to speak with.
To best collect my data for these variables, I chose to use semi-structured individual interviews by approaching individuals in different locations on campus and asking their feelings on abortion and how religious they are. I measured religiosity by asking different questions I thought indicated the level of how religious people are. I measured feelings on abortion by asking their overall view on it and then narrowing to specific circumstances if necessary. I chose this type of interview instead of a structured paper questionnaire because I decided I wanted to involve the respondents more. I wanted them to be able to expand on the extent of their abortion views and religiosity, without being confined to answer sets created by me. Indeed, an advantage of this method is that they could give more explanation so that I could understand their position better than I would have from a survey question. Abortion can be a complicated topic, so it is important to clarify with people the type of abortion they are envisioning and the circumstances they believe are appropriate for it to be legal. Having an open-ended question format also allowed them to demonstrate the salience of the issues in their minds. When they introduced a topic on their own, I could trust it was on the top of their mind whereas if they had circled it as a survey question option, they would not necessarily have cared about it without my drawing attention to it. Disadvantages of this method revolve around the sample. Conducting interviews is time consuming, so I had a small sample size which was also biased from my selection (see below). Another disadvantage came from the coding involved in creating quantitative analysis. Recognizing which parts of their open ended responses classified under my categories was a subjective act that could not always be completely uniform.
My initial plan was to have a sample size of 40 by talking to 5 people in each of 8 locations, however, only 5 locations ended up being successful, so I finished with a sample size of 25. I wanted to draw a sample of students from a wide range of academic backgrounds (because academic study often leans in a political direction) and social identities (because they impact your lens on the world), so I tried to collect data from areas of campus where different academic concentrators would be and in common university areas where a broad mix of students would be. The Union MUG and the Ugli proved to be the most successful for finding respondents. I eventually found enough outside the fishbowl, but I was held up by being told by an employee that I was not allowed to approach people inside. I wanted to talk to people in Beanster's in the League because the Jewish population is known to hang out there (so this would get different faiths for my study) and Espresso Royale on State St because more art and music students hang out there, but when I visited each of these places, everyone was studying, and I did not have the heart to try and interrupt them. Instead, I talked to people eating at the League food court because I had had success at the other common university locations because I approached people who were eating (or reading The Michigan Daily). I successfully talked to students (hopefully science majors) in the Chem building foyer, but I chose not to talk to anyone in the Business school lobby (as originally planned) because I realized the students were mostly MBA students whose age would not match my other respondents'. My last attempt was to talk to people at East Quad (which is known for having a different student population due to the Residential College residing there), but no one was outside because of the cold weather and no one was inside in the lounge (I assume because of finals).
Besides the location factor, I tried to get a sample mixed by gender and race -- which I was successful in obtaining. However, my sample could have been limited (beyond the lack of academic variety discussed above) by my hand selection. I did not talk to anyone I knew because I did not want their knowledge of my positions to color their response. I did not talk to anyone around someone else because I did not want another person's presence to impact their response. While I tried to control bias by establishing a comfortable interviewing environment, my sample was limited because most people were around others -- for study purposes or just socializing. The people in my sample size are those who were out in the public during my collection time, were by themselves and looking open to disruption, were hand selected by me, and who agreed to participate. (I had a few people tell me they did not have time to answer questions or did not want to.)
Besides the drawbacks of my sample, I must note that my study population is far from representing the general US population. I got a racially diverse population, but my small sample size made it impossible to get representatives from each gender in every race. Most respondents were between the ages of 18 and 22. Most respondents came from the middle class or above because you have to have money to come to an institution of secondary education, especially the University of Michigan (which has a tuition similar to that of private schools), and even more so if you have to pay out-of-state tuition. 60% of University students are from the state of Michigan, so my respondent population was skewed with more people from the state of Michigan, a Midwest state, than other states. Because the Midwest is known to be more conservative (especially on moral issues), the sample could have made people more likely to be against abortion, but the University of Michigan is known as a more liberal school, so political leaning might have been balanced, though I cannot say my study represents the beliefs of the majority of the US population.
My informed consent statement was: "By consenting, you have read the information above and consent to participate in the study." My project was confidential versus anonymous because I identified each respondent with a number so that his or her responses could be traced back for an individual analysis if necessary. It remained ethical because I never asked for any personal identification. My study posed no risks except potential personal emotional struggle if respondents had experienced hardship surrounding abortion or religion. One respondent did appear very uneasy when I asked him questions as he took full minutes in between his responses. Other respondents admitted that their current religious affiliation was something they had been struggling with since coming to college. My study could have been more harmful if given to vulnerable subjects such as pregnant women since the subject manner directly relates to them.
I devised an Interview Guide (see appendix) to assist when I individually talked to my respondents for about five minutes each. My operational definition of abortion was: the medical surgery to stop a pregnancy. (This means that self-imposed abortion or attempt to miscarriage is not what I operated from, but was noted if brought up by respondents.) My operational definition of religion was: the belief in supernatural powers in the creation of the universe or influence over destiny. (This means that spirituality was not being considered, yet noted if respondents interpret "religion" that way.) My purpose was to simply discover respondents' feelings on my two concepts and their personal demographic identifications.
I first asked the general, "How do you feel about abortion?". Some respondents appeared confused or asked if I meant "pro-life or pro-choice." In each situation, I replied, "Just your general view." I hoped to see if respondents would note specific situations where the legality of abortion should be assured or circumstances when abortion should definitely be illegal. I left space on my form to record if they noted these things on their own initially. If they did not, I asked if they thought there were specific circumstances for legality or illegality. If they appeared confused, I suggested that some people had said rape.
I used the same procedure for measuring their religiosity: asking how religious they are then narrowing to specifics (attendance at religious services/independent religious study/faith) to get a greater understanding if they were not initially specific. I sometimes clarified with "so you would say you are somewhat religious" to make sure that how I would classify them later was acceptable to them. Because I asked their religiosity directly after I asked their views on abortion, I designated room on my form to note if respondents made justifications about their paradoxical identifications between the concepts. Only a few respondents did. Finally, I asked for their self-identification in the following categories: year in school, gender, age, socioeconomic status, race, and region where they are from. Some respondents were confused because they thought I was asking, "You're in school?" at first. Others said they struggle in designating where they fall along racial or regional lines. I directed: "however you self-identify." An interesting observation if that most respondents thought gender was assumed and gave me a weird look when I asked for their identification (even though sociological theory says that gender should not be assumed because it is socially constructed).
In conducting my interviews, I tried to appear as unbiased as possible. When respondents were talking, I would look down at the paper where I was transcribing to avoid judgment being shown on my face. I maintained a friendly, approachable tone no matter what their responses were. As noted above, I tried to approach respondents in non-threatening environments (when they were alone/not busy) so that they could be as open and truthful as possible. I had created my guide to be semi-structured, but it was interesting because respondents gave fairly structured responses as if they were waiting for me to run down a list of questions. Perhaps this is due to a natural assumption of a structured format when asked to participate in an interview. Consequently, I did not gather a deep understanding of why they held their views on abortion.
My study is limited due to the characteristics of the sample (see above) and the religious identification of respondents. A problem is that I was not consistent in how I asked for specification on legality/illegality issues during the first few interviews. Next time I would be sure to have a set next question in response to their answers. As far as sample, next time I would want to include Jewish and Muslim people, as well as any other different religion to see if other faiths confounded the results. My results are not necessarily reliable because different results might be obtained from talking to people of different faiths -- or simply different individuals. I do, however, believe that my results are valid (though not generalizable to my ideal population) because of the environment of comfort I established in my data collection. Some respondents noted how abortion is an ethical issue surrounded by controversy and disagreement. One guy would not commit to his views until I frankly asked him to. Some respondents admitted that they are not what they would consider "true Christians." The order of my questions, with religiosity after views on abortion, might have caused self-questioning of religious commitment more so than if not asked to commit to a stance on a moral issue. This potentially amounted to respondents feeling the need to give disclaimers, but I still believe honesty was involved overall.
My dependent variable (feelings on abortion) was measured by "abortionlevel." Most respondents (16) felt its legality should depend on the situation, while 1 person thought it should never be legal and 8 felt it should always be legal.
The "otherexception" variable also measured the dependent variable by showing a scale of exceptions for when abortion should be legal, from most negative feelings toward abortion to most positive feelings. It was helpful because respondents were more spread out in their answers:
The "religionlevel" variable measured my independent variable (religiosity) through a scale of responses that were self-identified and/or interpreted by me, the interviewer. 48% of respondents were somewhat religious while 40% were not at all religious:
The confounding variable was age. I later recoded responses to compare "under 20" to "20 or older" to create an approximately even sample for subgroup comparison:
To best compare the relationship between the independent and dependant variables, they were recoded into new variables and compared through crosstabs and correlations. The variable "new abortion measure" was created from an "otherexception" recode of "strict on exceptions" versus "liberal on exceptions." The "religionlevel" variable was recoded so that "not religious" was compared to any identification of religion: "religious in some sense." (see codebook in appendix)
The crosstab shows that the majority of religious people (53%) and the majority of not relgious people (60%) were both more liberal on abortion. My hypothesis was that more religious people would be more against abortion than non-religious people, and this is shown to some extent (47% v. 40%), but the relations of the independent and dependant variables had only a weak correlation at -.066. My hypothesis was proven correct, but only slightly and not to a significant amount:
I also measured the effect of confounders. By layering the "abortion measure" v "religion recode" table with "younger v older" (the age variable recoded), I found that abortion views differed on whether respondents were under 20 or older:
75% of the "not religious" respondents who were under 20 had liberal views on abortion, while only 50% of the "20 or older" did. Of the religious respondents, 62.5% of those under 20 held stricter views on abortion while only 28.6% of the older religious people did. This shows that the aggregate relationship between religiosity and views on abortion differs when you single out age. My overall findings showed that religious people had slightly more negative views toward abortion whereas here, only the younger religious people had more negative views toward abortion. The difference was due to age, not religiosity.
My study population is limited because the demographics of students at the University of Michigan do not relate to the demographics of the country as a whole, because my sample was not representative of all religious views, and because my sample was small in size. My results do show a support for my hypothesis, but only slightly. More religious people were against abortion than were non-religious people, but only through a weak correlation. Age was also shown to be confounding. To better generalize these results, I would have to interview more people with more varied social identities. I wish I had been uniform in asking their specifics for the extent of legality from the start. If I were going to do more research on this topic (besides having a larger and more representative sample size), I would like to explore political party identification as another possible confounding variable.

Family harmony and marriage maintenance have both been highly valued in Chinese society. Especially for traditional Chinese families, to maintain the intactness and seeming harmony of the family, couples in an unharmonious relationship have often been encouraged to stay in the unhappy marriages rather than choosing a divorce, which is even considered humiliating under extremely conservative social contexts. This is especially true for western China which is less developed and for some minority ethnic groups which are restricted by their religions. Gansu, as both a western and a multi-ethnicity province,1 is a crucial context to investigate the determinants of the attitudes toward unhappy marriages. Moreover, to examine the demographic, socioeconomic and ideational determinants of the attitudes toward unhappy marriages is a critical step to further understand how people's values of the familial attributes and marital patterns are associated with their respective socioeconomic status and the process of modernization in China.
(1) Data: Collected in 2007, the Developmental Idealism in China Survey is a cross-sectional survey of individuals who reside in the rural or industrial areas of seven counties in Gansu with three villages or communities in each county. Using the multistage and clustered area probability sampling, the survey interviewed 633 respondents during November and December of 2007. This survey mainly includes questions about respondent's basic demographic information and idealism on development, family and marriage.
(2) Dependent variable: The dependent variable in this study is based on the answers to the question "Overall, which do you think is better for most people around the world today – choosing divorce or staying in an unhappy marriage?" The answers are treated as a dichotomous variable consisting of "divorce (=1)" and "unhappy marriage (=0)".2
(3) Independent variables
Three types of independent variables are used for this study – demographic characteristics, socioeconomic characteristics and modernity factors. Firstly, a group of demographic characteristics variables are used including respondents' sex ("1"> male and "0" female) and age. Including sex in the analysis is because there has been severe gender inequality in traditional China and women's marriage selections have been restricted more strictly. It might be crucial to investigate the gender disparities of the attitudes toward unhappy marriages. To include age in the analysis is because when people get older, their related social networks are becoming more complicated and widespread and it is more likely that their marriage selections may be restricted by a "dual pressure" – not only pressures from the parents, but also pressures from the children. Therefore, it may also be important to examine the age evolution of the attitudes toward unhappy marriages.
Secondly, a group of socioeconomic characteristics variables are included. Respondents' education (below elementary: reference group; "1" elementary and "0" otherwise; "1" junior high and "0" otherwise; "1" senior high and "0" otherwise; "1" vocational/technical and "0" otherwise; "1" associate and "0" otherwise; "1" bachelor/above and "0" otherwise) is included because with higher education, people may become more modernized and tolerant of diversified personal selections including marriage selections. Respondents' marital status ("1" ever married and "0" never married) is included since these two groups may respectively hold insider and outsider perspectives which may result in their different attitudes toward unhappy marriage. Respondents' religion ("1" with religion and "0" without religion) is included because the marriage attitudes of religious people may be restricted by their beliefs. Income (less than 1000 Yuan: reference group; "1" 1001-4000 Yuan and "0" otherwise; "1" 4001-15000 Yuan and "0" otherwise; "1" more than 15001 Yuan and "0" otherwise) and self-assigned social class
Thirdly, a set of ideational variables indicating modernity factors are included based on the assumption that modernity is consistent with more tolerant and diversified attitudes, as well as more respect for personal freedom and equality. These variables are included to test whether the more modern and tolerant the respondent is, the more likely a divorce would be preferred in an unhappy marriage. This measure of modernity includes six variables: living with parents ("1" living separately and '"0" living with parents), unmarried mother ("1"> acceptable and "0" unacceptable), cohabitation ("1" premarital cohabitation and "0" no premarital cohabitation), elderly parents living alone ("1" living alone and "0" living with adult children), arranged marriage ("1" choose own spouse and "0" parents choose spouse) and female premarital sex ("1" premarital sex and "0" waiting until marriage).4
Table 1 presents the summary statistics of key variables of interest in the study and Table 2 demonstrates the distributions of attitudes toward unhappy marriages across different demographic and socioeconomic variables. As can be seen in Table 2, generally males, those ever married and those having no religions are more likely to prefer choosing a divorce. Moreover, although below the education of senior high diploma and vocational/tech diploma people are more likely to prefer staying in unhappy marriages, above that level people are generally more likely to prefer choosing a divorce. Especially, there is a consistent trend for income and social class that the higher income people have and the higher social class people assign to themselves, the less likely they prefer choosing a divorce in unhappy marriages. Therefore, several of my above interpretations are primarily supported by these descriptive statistics. However, rigorous regression analysis is quite necessary to provide more reliable examinations.
In order to further investigate the determinants of attitudes toward unhappy marriages, I conduct three binary logit analyses. Model 1 only includes respondents' demographic characteristics, Model 2 further includes respondents' socioeconomic characteristics and Model 3 includes respondents' modernity factors besides variables included in Model 2. As can be seen in the log-likelihood ratio tests shown in Table 3, Model 2 is a significant improvement to Model 1 and Model 3 is a significant improvement to Model 2. Therefore, aside from demographic characteristics, both respondents' socioeconomic characteristics and modernity factors are crucial determinants of their attitudes toward unhappy marriages.
As can be seen in both Table 3 and Table 4, different from what is shown by descriptive statistics, the odds of preferring for a divorce are only about 0.696 as large for males as they are for females. If respondent's age increases by one year, the odds of preferring for a divorce decrease by 2%. In terms of education, below senior high diploma and vocational/tech diploma, the odds of preferring for a divorce has been increasing from 2.193, 2.589, 3.216 to 3.354 compared to that of a education lower than elementary school; however, above senior high diploma and vocational/tech diploma, the odds starts to decline from 3.354, 2.152 to 1.035, but these later effects are found insignificant in this study. In addition, the odds of preferring for a divorce are only about 0.265 as large for those ever married as they are for those never married. Both the religion and income effects are found to be insignificant in the regression results. Interestingly, self-assigned social class plays a significant role in deciding the respondents' preference in an unhappy marriage, but its estimated effect is converse to the results of descriptive statistics. The odds of preferring for a divorce are about 1.724 times as large for those middle-class respondents (self-assigned social class between 3 and 7) and 2.933 times as large for those high-class respondents (self-assigned social class between 8-10) as they are for those low-class respondents (self-assigned social class between 0 and 2). Moreover, among the six modernity factors, only the effect of the variable indicating whether married children live separately or with their parents is statistically significant. The odds of preferring for a divorce are about 1.908 times as large for those preferring living separately as they are for those preferring living with parents.
In this study, I investigated how one's demographic, socioeconomic and modernity factors influence his/her likelihood of preferring a divorce to staying in an unhappy marriage. The results of this preliminary study indicate that: 1) women are more likely to prefer a divorce in an unhappy marriage; 2) the older one is, the less likely he/she would prefer a divorce; 3) for educational levels below college education, the higher education one has, the more likely he/she would prefer a divorce under an increasing likelihood; 4) those ever married are very less likely to prefer a divorce; 5) the higher one's social class is, the more likely he/she would prefer a divorce under an increasing likelihood; 6) the more modern one's values are, the more likely he/she would prefer a divorce in an unhappy marriage. Therefore, all of the demographic, socioeconomic and modernity factors affect one's attitudes toward an unhappy marriage.

Interest in improving the condition and position of women, especially in poor countries have focused on the ideas of status improvement and empowerment. Though much of sociological literature on this topic focuses on trying to clarify the ambiguity about the definition and elements of these ideas, the more universally and broadly used definition in various "plans of actions" focus on the contexts of women's access to knowledge, economic resources and political power, as well as their personal autonomy in the process of decision making (United Nations, 1994).
Sociological research on the processes and individual and social outcomes of educational attainment is probably one of the most studied areas in the field. A growing body of literature also focuses on the outcomes of women's economic autonomy on changes in their roles and positions. But evidence of the impact of collective action processes (community groups), a key strategy for implementing the plans of action for empowerment and status attainment of women at the grassroots level, has not been well documented, apart from program evaluations. Most of what has been documented focuses on the efforts of group based micro-credit programs and its outcomes on changes (both positive and negative) on the position and condition of women in poor countries (Hashemi, et al. 1996; Schuler, et al. 1997).
Even after decades of focusing on "gender and development", and women's empowerment, do poor women have increasing control over their lives? Are they able to make decisions and control the implementation of them? What kinds of changes in behavior among men and women in poor settings are affecting their attitudes towards gender roles? How are these attitudes bringing changes in the status and the empowerment of women vis a vis men at the household, community and national levels?
Though there are many questions that still need to be answered, this study only attempts to look at the overall effects of participation in community groups on attitudes about the participation of women in household decision making, using survey data from a rapidly changing social setting in Nepal. It also tests the theory about the linkages between educational attainment and attitudes about women's participation in household level decision making in a society with low levels of education.
Nepali society is multiethnic and multicultural consisting of many linguistic sub groups, social beliefs and practices, as well as variations in gender relations within the ethnic groups (Bista, 1972). A predominately Hindu society, the social structure is marked by patriarchy and strict gender hierarchies, where gender roles are characterized by greater access, control and decision making over resources (social, economic and political) by men at the household, community and national levels, though these roles vary by ethnic groups (Acharya and Bennett, 1981).
To examine the links between educational attainment and group participation on egalitarian gender attitudes about decision making at the household level, this study is guided by the framework of the family mode of social organization (Thornton, Fricke, et al. 1994), its linkages to modernization theory (Inkeles and Smith, 1974) and the conceptual framework of the development paradigm (Thornton, 2001; Thornton, 2005).
The family mode of social organization focuses on social change brought about by the changes in the extent to which activities of daily social life, formerly controlled by the family, came to be organized by a host of social structures and institutions such as schools, industries, other employment opportunities, dormitories, mass media, etc. that began to influence many dimensions of life (Thornton, Fricke, et al. 1994:89). The study setting in Chitwan too has undergone tremendous social and economic changes with the introduction of new social organizations and services (as well as an influx of international aid to support poverty alleviation) that have made considerable impact on family structure, fertility behavior, marriage patterns and the attitudes of people on different elements of life (Barber, 2004; Ghimire, et al. 2006). Apart from the growth in access to education, in the past two decades, as per the policies of the government of Nepal1, people in Chitwan have also been introduced to new organizations and processes such as non family collective and social action that have sought to stimulate and support social change and economic growth in the society. Participation of men and women in such non family organizations and greater exposure through education is likely to bring changes in the socio-cultural traditions and behavior within the family, including influencing changes in decision making at the household levels.
The modernization theory posits that societies industrialize and Westernize, with "Third World" countries like Nepal, at the lower end of a continuum of social change that tries to emulate the systems and processes of "developed" countries on the higher end, like United States and Western European countries. The movement along this continuum can be marked by growing individualistic attitudes and behavior towards religion, the family, social stratification, women's rights, politics, mass media, consumerism, and other topics (Inkeles and Smith, 1974:25). Government plans and policies have also emphasized "modernization" of different sectors in the country. Though the pace of change has been slow, elements of the modernization theory are likely to impact upon behavior and attitudes. Modern education in particular exposes men and women to the ideologies of individualism and independence, leading to more egalitarian attitudes. In their 1974 study of tracking social changes in six different countries based on the modernization theory, Inkeles and Smith hypothesize that "...the liberating influence of the forces making for modernization would act on men's attitudes, and incline them to accord to women status and rights more nearly equal to those enjoyed by men" (ibid:26).
The developmental paradigm is another powerful framework to explain and guide social change, which has been applied at the individual, organizational and societal levels. Thornton (2001 and 2005) explains how the power of the development idealism lies in what it posits as "...its ability to change structures, ideas, attitudes and behaviors, and that it is largely a value system indicating basic human rights, the nature of good life and the means to achieve the desired ends" (Thornton, 2005:240). This has guided the concept of socio-economic and political change or progress ("development") in poorer countries in Asia and Africa -- both by governments of the countries and international aid institutions. Furthermore, Thornton also states that "the power of developmental paradigm provided a powerful framework for ordinary people because they defined some of the attributes of the good life, specified causal approaches to reaching the good life and provided statements of fundamental human rights" (ibid:234). Therefore modern education and processes for social and economic change are elements that are likely to have been strongly influenced by the development paradigm, in aiming for the "good life" and for more egalitarian attitudes as a basis of fundamental human rights.
Within the context of these theories and frameworks, this study proposes two hypotheses:
Some specific mechanisms are also suggested that would operate to produce the relationships hypothesized above.
Studies have shown how formal education has been linked to social change and a wide range of social transformations such as economic growth, demographic transitions, political growth, and status attainment (Caldwell, 1982, Axinn and Barber, 2001; Beutel and Axinn, 2002). In a setting marked by patriarchy and strict gender hierarchies, men and women gaining education in schools not only exposes them to non family social contexts, but also widens their knowledge and increases their skills, and exposes them to the diffusion of the spread of new (or modern) aspirations or attitudes towards family roles, potentially more egalitarian gender roles. This is in line with the modernization theory that suggests how western education exposes women and men to ideologies emphasizing independence from the extended family and egalitarian conjugal relationships (Caldwell, 1982). This potentially holds true in Chitwan too as the education system and context in Nepal is heavily influenced by that of India, where western educational traditions and curricula were established by the British during the colonial period. In their 1997 study Malhotra and Mather also point out that increased education and increased opportunities for non family and paid employment are also likely to cause structural changes in the economic roles of family units, of women, or even of children but their key focus in the study is how "... the relationship between education, work and women's control of household decisions is conditioned by the larger social context" (ibid: 601).
With their increased skills, knowledge and self confidence, their potential for accessing credit or earning income, and their ability to influence change at the community levels, acknowledgement of and respect for the changing role of women relative to men could lead to changes in the attitudes of men and women too, about both having a more equal share in household decision making (though as Malhotra and Mather suggest, this could be conditioned by the large social context).
Since the advent of development aid in Nepal more than two decades ago, the principle implementation strategy of most development agencies in the country has been through group formation and group-oriented activities (Biggs, et al. 2004). For both government and non government programs and projects, community groups have become a popular vehicle for reaching people with services -- family and reproductive health, rural infrastructure, agriculture and livestock, management of natural resources (water, forests), access to credit, etc. Such groups were established at the local levels to focus on service delivery and on social inclusion of poor and marginalized groups in the planning and development processes, and for the empowerment of the group members. Evidence about the effect of such group activities have focused on the impact of credit programs in women's social and economic empowerment and also on changes in their fertility behavior (Hashemi, et al. 1996; Schuler, et al. 1997).
Research about the links between behavior and attitudes (Cleland and Hobcraft, 1985; Thornton, Alwin, and Camburn, 1983) provide a useful framework to better understand how non family behaviors can potentially influence attitudes. Participation in community group activities exposes men and women to non family settings, activities, ideas and processes that lead to a departure in the family mode of social organization. They are exposed to new knowledge and ideas (new techniques and practical skills), have increased access to information and services (accessing credit and other government and NGO resources, natural resource management, their legal and human rights) and increased self esteem, self worth and self confidence, which in turn could culminate in a desire for increased social attainment and participation in decision making processes at the household and community levels. Such non family and non traditional behavior would potentially lead to new attitudes about gender roles at individual, community and organizational levels.
More recently, many groups in Nepal have developed into higher level networks, federations, cooperatives and NGOs, which are getting involved in policy advocacy and securing the rights and interests of their members. One of such example is the Federation of Community Forests Users of Nepal-FECOFUN (Biggs, et al. 2004). But groups at the community level have also successfully been able to lobby for schools or health clinics in their neighborhoods (Barber et. al, 2001)
Thus men and women who have participated in groups and have some levels of education are likely to have more egalitarian attitudes about decision making at the household level compared to those who have not participated in group activities ever or have had lesser or no education.
The setting of the Chitwan Valley in south central Nepal is ideal for this study due to the settlement history of the area and the dramatic changes it has gone through since. In the mid 1950s the government of Nepal allowed for clearing of the densely forested area, eradication of malaria and allowed re-settlement of migrants (particularly from the mid and high hills) into the valley, who were attracted by the fertile soils. Therefore, there is a mixture of different ethnic groups that are living within the study area, all of whom have distinct socio-cultural identities, languages and religious affiliations allowing a study of the ethnic diversity of the country within a microcosm. The study area has seen rapid changes in socio-economic conditions and physical environment of the valley within a short span of time especially since the mid 1970s due to the linkages of several key transportation routes. This brought important changes in access to education, health and other government services (agriculture and livestock, natural resource management), employment, wage labor participation, as well as considerable focus of international donors and NGOs to support the government's efforts in improving service delivery through a multitude of development programs.
For the purpose of my analysis, I use data from the 1996-1997 Chitwan Valley Family Study (CVFS). The CVFS selected a systematic probability sample of 171 neighborhoods in western Chitwan (Barber, et al.1997) where neighborhoods were defined as a geographic cluster of 5-15 households. The structured individual survey component interviewed every resident between the ages of 15 and 59 in the sampled neighborhoods leading to a sample size of 5,271 respondents. The respondents were asked a variety of questions regarding their family background, personal characteristics, experiences, childhood community context, marriage and marital relationships, their attitudes about various aspects of social life and their participation in groups. Immediately following the individual interview, information was collected about the respondent's age, residence, marital status, children, contraceptive use, living arrangements, schooling and work experience using a semi-structured life history calendar. The questionnaires were administered by field staff in face-to-face interviews conducted in the homes of the respondents with a response rate of 97%2.
For the purpose of my analysis, only respondents between the ages 25-54 are used leading to a sample size of 2,851. Respondents between ages of 15-24 were dropped as they are more likely to participate in youth clubs rather than community groups and are also more likely to be in the process of completing their high school education. Respondents of the age group 55 and above were also dropped due to the relatively small number of cases. The CVFS classified the communities into five major ethnic groups -- the High Caste Hindus (the largest group), Low Caste Hindus, Hill Tibeto-Burmese, Terai Tibeto-Burmese, the Newars and the rest were classified as "others" (Axinn and Barber, 2001). The last category was also dropped for this analysis due to the small number of observations.
The CFVS collected a number of measures of attitudes related to women's roles at the individual and household levels. This study focuses on only one of those measures related to what I take to represent "egalitarian attitudes" within the household. This was measured using responses to a statement that was presented -- "A man should make most of the decisions in the household". The responses to this question was fairly normally distributed on a scale of 1 "strongly agree" (33.46%), 2 "agree" (27.32), 3 "disagree" (38%) and 4 "strongly disagree" (0.84%).
As this study examines the effect of educational attainment and participation in groups on gender attitudes of men and women in Chitwan, two independent variables are tested. The first variable measures "participation in groups ever" through asking respondents whether they had ever been a member of any groups or associations such as a User's Group, Mothers Group, health groups, Rotary Club, etc. This is a dichotomous variable with 18% (n=514) of the respondents having ever participated in groups. A follow-up question was also asked to identify the types of groups respondents had ever been members.
The second variable I use, "educational attainment" is a partially continuous variable where respondents were asked the highest grade in school or year of college they had completed (from no education to 10 years and more). Over 52% of respondents have had no education and almost 16% have had 10 years or more of education.
Several control variables are included in the multivariate models that are likely to affect egalitarian attitudes that are specific to the context of the study area. As mentioned earlier, Nepali society is broadly polarized in terms of gender roles and attitudes and this study attempts to better understand some of the factors that might contribute towards reducing this polarization. Controlling for gender of the respondents (coded female=1, male=0) makes it possible to study egalitarian attitudes without the influence of gender, though the differences in attitudes among men and women and the factors affecting those differences also merits in-depth analysis.
Differences in age and in birth cohorts also exert differing influences on social roles and expectations in Nepali society especially in the case of a strictly hierarchal society and more so in the case where within a span of 50 years many socio-economic and political changes have been introduced in the study area. Therefore birth cohort (coded 1 and 0 for six dummy variables) is also used as a control. The latest and the earliest cohorts have been dropped from this analysis while cohort1 (age group 25-34) is used as the reference group. Due to variations in the status and conditions of women in different ethnic groups caste/ethnicity is also used as a control with five categories and the Upper Caste Hindu used as the reference group.
A set of parental characteristics ("mother ever educated", "father ever educated", "mother worked for pay" and "father worked for pay") are also used as controls since previous research has indicated the impact of parental attitudes and behavior on children (Axinn & Thornton, 1996; Thornton, 1991). These are also dichotomous variables. Recent research has also provided evidence of the effect of community level changes on individual behavior (Axinn & Barber, 2001) hence I use two measures that represent community level characteristics that could likely influence individual behavior and attitudes. The "presence of development groups" and "women's groups" in the neighborhood when the respondent was 12 years old, are two measures that are also used as controls in this study.
Descriptive statistics for all the measures used are presented in Table 1 while the breakdown of membership in different kinds of groups is presented in Table 2. The effect of different types of groups on egalitarian attitudes that have been more meaningful and have had more policy implications but it is beyond the scope of this study due to limited numbers in the different categories of data.
Tables 1 and 2 about here
Ordinary least square (OLS) regression procedures are used to estimate the multivariate models of egalitarian attitudes. This technique is applied using the dependent variable as a continuous variable with the assumption that the higher the value on the scale (from 1-4), the more egalitarian the attitude, thereby ordering it from lower to higher even though there is no numeric precision. Nested models are tested, introducing sets of different control variables (individual levels, parental characteristics, childhood neighborhood characteristics and finally interaction effects) to see how the effect of group participation and educational attainment on egalitarian attitudes is affected by the control variables and the interaction effects.
Additionally, logistic regression is used to estimate egalitarian attitudes and to test if the results are consistent in their direction with the OLS estimates. A summary measure of the dependent variable "male decides" is examined, with the categories of "strongly agree" and "agree" collapsed together to specify non egalitarian attitudes (coded 0-60.79%) while "disagree "and "highly disagree" are collapsed together to specify egalitarian attitudes (coded 1-39.21%). The same controls are examined in this analysis as well.
The estimates of the effects of group participation and educational attainment on egalitarian gender attitudes related to decision-making at the household level are presented in Table 3. I test nested models and the incremental F tests for the control variables -- gender, birth cohort and caste variables are statistically significant indicating the fit of those variables in the regression model. For parental and childhood neighborhood characteristics it is not significant but since, theoretically, I expected the latter variables to also have had some influence on egalitarian attitudes of the respondents, I leave them in the subsequent models.
Table 3 about here
In the second step, a set of individual level controls -- gender, birth cohort and caste/ethnicity are introduced and presented in model 2. The third step presents the estimates of adding controls that are related to parental characteristics in model 3 where two variables were tested -- whether mothers and fathers of the respondents ever went to school, and whether they ever held paid jobs when the respondents were young. The fourth step of the analysis presents additional estimates from the effects of two neighborhood characteristic when the respondents where 12 years old -- whether their neighborhood had any development activities and whether there were any women's groups.
Compared to the reference category, the more recent birth cohort (ages 24-35), cohort 3 is less egalitarian as expected, but the results are not statistically significant indicating little differences within the different birth cohorts. This could be due to the fact that the most educated group lies within the most recent cohort (ages 15-24) which has been dropped for the study. Model 4 provides evidence that 11.03% of the variance in egalitarian attitudes can be attributed to a person's participation in groups and education levels controlling for a number of factors.
The last two models 5 and 6 (Table 3) present estimates of the effect on egalitarian attitudes testing for interaction effects of gender and educational attainment, and gender and participation in groups. Since gender differences are quite wide in Nepal, I estimated that interaction effects of gender on education and on group participation might prevail but the results show that such effects are not statistically significant. Yet even then, when I ran separate models to estimate the effects for males and females (results not shown) it was interesting to find the effects were greater for males than for females, indicating that educational attainment and group participation had stronger effects on male egalitarian attitudes.
Table 4 presents the results of the logistic regression where the results, though not directly comparable with the OLS regression, do indicate results in the same direction.
Table 4 about here
For every person who participates in group activities the odds of being egalitarian is 45% higher compared to those who did not participate in group activities, controlling for their education. For every additional year of education a person has their odds of having egalitarian attitudes multiplicated by 1.12. For instance, compared to someone with no education, a person with six years of education has an odds ratio of 97% higher of having egalitarian attitudes. It is interesting to note that only six years of education increases the odds of being egalitarian by almost 100%. Also being a Lower Caste Hindu, Hill Tibeto-Burmese or a Terai Tibeto-Burmese have lower odds (0.55, 0.55 and 0.49 times respectively) of having egalitarian attitudes compared to the High Caste Hindus. Parental characteristics and childhood neighborhood characteristics are not significantly associated with gender attitudes and birth cohorts are also not significantly associated.
The key research question for this study was to better understand the kinds of behavior at the individual and community levels which would bring in more egalitarian attitudes at the household levels. I find that men and women who have ever participated in groups and those who have more years of education have more egalitarian attitudes about decision making and that this is statistically a highly significant association when controlling for a number of individual, parental and childhood community characteristics. The results for the effect of group participation is quite relevant as it boosts policy efforts of service delivery, creating demand and advocating for rights and interests of poor and marginalized sections of the society, towards social inclusion and egalitarianism.
More relevant to policy feedback and program implementation would be evidence of the differential impact of the status of group membership (general member or an executive member) and the differential impact of participation in different types of groups. This was beyond the scope of this paper due to limited number of observations per different types of groups and no data about the types of membership. A second wave of this study can also provide opportunities for measuring changes in egalitarianism over the years and with some additional data a better understanding of how participation in group activities can lead to social attainment and egalitarianism.

In the fall of my senior year in high school, two of my closest girlfriends and I left the large, Midwestern, city we lived in and drove an hour south to tour an highly elite, private liberal arts college. This school was consistently ranked by the "US News and World Report" in the top 5 liberal arts schools in the country, and widely considered the "best" school in the region. Being smart and career-minded young women with close ties to family, friends, and boyfriends in the city we lived in, we all hoped to like it.
While on the tour with 10 or so other high school juniors and seniors -- and a few parents -- also visiting the school, I asked the tour guide about rape on campus. From my experiences in high school and feminist politics I knew/believed that sexual assault was widespread and pervasive, however this particular school had experienced a well-publicized rape the previous year, and I was curious to see how she would respond to my question. The tour guide responded by telling me about rape whistles, showing me the lights that lit nearly all corners of the small, isolated campus. She then told me, in a dismissive tone, that, besides, the only sexual assault cases they had involved alcohol.1
This incident left a powerful impression on me. At the time, I thought that was a ridiculous response. I remember sarcastically commenting to my friends that as there was no alcohol on campus we would all be safe. At the time, my assumption was that the tour guide's response was her way of providing a quick answer to a difficult question, while simultaneously managing to reassure the parents on the tour that their children could be safe at that school as long as they chose to avoid (being around) alcohol. It was not until later that I began to think about the implicit devaluing of (the experiences of) the women/girls who chose to drink and/or be around others drinking; girls who chose to participate in campus party culture.
This paper is a study of those girls -- the ones who choose to participate in campus party culture -- and their perceptions of the risk of sexual violence. The larger project from which the data for this paper is drawn explores the co-constructions of gender and partying through the mechanisms of peer culture, same and cross-gender relationships, bodily experiences of alcohol and drug consumption, sexuality, the pleasures and dangers of partying -- including the risk of sexual violence, and their variations along different identity dimensions (such as race, ethnicity, class, sorority status). The focus of this paper is on one particular aspect of gender construction in the context of partying: the co-constitutive and dynamic engagement of late adolescent, binge-drinking women with the "slutty" discourse and its implications for the risk (and experience) of sexual assault.
Through analysis of data from 31 in-depth interviews, I show some ways in which the binge-drinking college women who I interviewed engage with a discourse of "sluttiness" in the sexualized campus party culture. I begin by demonstrating the pleasure women associate with partying, and that partying is constructed with a particular element of sexuality; providing one possible answer for why women participate in the traditionally masculine domain party culture with well-publicized risks. I then show that the popular conception of a "slut" as a woman who has sex with many different men in a relatively short period of time without a necessary or strong emotional attachment to the men involved (Stombler, 1994; Armstrong et. al, 2005),3 is not the definition of slut at work in the culture of the women I interviewed. I conclude by discussing the implications of binge-drinking college women's engagement with the "sluttiness" discourse for, a) the real and perceived risk of sexual violence, b) the mental and psychological well-being of (the many) women who are sexually assaulted, and c) the "othering" of women who are labeled as "slutty."
There is an extensive, and overwhelmingly quantitative, literature documenting the prevalence of sexual violence on campus and its frequent relationship to partying (Abbey, 2002; Adams-Curtis & Forbes, 2004; Armstrong, Hamilton, & Sweeney, 2005; Boswell & Spade, 1996; Corbin, Bernat, Calhoun, McNair, & Seals, 2001; Handler, 1995; Martin & Hummer, 1989; Stombler, 1994; Ullman, Karabatsos & Koss, 1999). Prevalence rates of sexual violence on campus, very often accompanied by alcohol consumption, constitute college women as a "high risk" group that experiences sexual assault at substantially higher rates than the general population. One research team (Sorenson, Stein, Seigel, Golding & Burnam, 1987) found that college women are at three times greater risk of sexual assault than the general population of the same age and gender.
In 1987, Koss developed the Sexual Experiences Survey (SES) to study rape and sexual assault on college campuses. It is now a widely used and validated measure. Items on the SES ask about specific unwanted sexual behaviors. Included in these items is a question about unwanted sexual contact while under the influence of alcohol.4
In a nationally representative sample of 6,159 college women using the SES, Koss (1987) found that approximately 54% of college women had experienced at least one instance of a sexual assault of any kind, 15% had been raped and 12% experienced attempted rape. Later replication studies have produced similar findings (Finkelson, & Oswalt, 1995 Schwartz & DeKeseredy, 1997).
It is important to acknowledge that any attempt to quantify incidence of rape or other sexual assault must be viewed with a critical eye. There are many social and psychological imperatives to deny, minimize, or "re-frame" one's own experiences with interpersonal violence to fit a more culturally or socially acceptable script (Campbell, Sefl, & Aherns, 2004; French, 2003). In addition, the phrases "sexual assault,"
Given the astounding prevalence of sexual violence on college and university campuses, many researchers have devoted their careers to explaining this phenomenon. The vast majority of the work has focused on quantifying individual level variables such as how much the victim and/or the perpetrator had been drinking, did the victim or perpetrator have physical, sexual or emotional abuse history, to what extent did he/they adhere to rape myth beliefs, etc (Adams-Curtis, & Forbes, 2004; Armstrong, 2005; Littelton & Axsom, 2003; Carmody & Washington, 2001).5
Academic work on campus sexual violence has been primarily, although not exclusively, quantitative. Despite an early and on-going emphasis on individual-level factors such as those listed above for sexual violence, by the late-1980s work on sexual violence on college campuses began to incorporate insights from qualitative methodology and from sociology. This methodological, and to some extent disciplinary, analysis brought analysis of situational or contextual aspects, such as the organization of fraternities, (Boswell & Spade, 1996; Martin & Hummer, 1989) on sexual violence on campus.
In Martin & Hummer's important article on fraternities and rape (1989) they argue that the structure of fraternities, of which hyper-masculinity, excessive drinking and partying, "scoring" with women, and devout loyalty to the brotherhood are important elements, creates an atmosphere (particularly at parties) that facilitates and encourages rape. They conclude that sexual violence on campus is not likely to be reduced until the culture and social organization of fraternities change. In the mean time, they call for more monitoring of fraternities, particularly their use of alcohol, by campus officials.
Armstrong et al. (2005) expanded this existing analysis to construct a theory of campus sexual assault that is simultaneously rooted in both the structural organization of the University and the specific practices of (groups of) individual students. They call their approach to theorizing campus sexual assault the "social organization and peer culture approach". Their analysis expands upon previous research in two important ways. First, it acknowledges that fraternities are large contributors to the rape-supportive structure of a University's social life, but they are not the only culprits. University policies such as the manner and extent to which alcohol use is restricted, the organization of non-Greek housing (dorms, primarily) and the limited interaction between first year and more advanced students, all contribute to a pro-rape college culture.
Secondly, Armstrong et al. (2005) emphasize the role of individual actors, and groups of actors, in shaping a college culture that enables party rape. Their analysis of the peer culture of college women, along with that of Handler's (1995) study of sorority women, provide some of the only attempts to explain the active participation of women in dangerous party scenes. Based on ethnographic observation and interviews with college women at a large Midwestern University, Armstrong and her colleagues argue that the peer culture of college women creates a situation in which choosing not to participate in the (specifically Greek) party scene would mean "social death." Their research, in addition to that of Stombler (1994) and Holland and Eisenhart, (1990) suggests that attention they get from men (which Young et al. (2005) and others have argued can now be gained from participating in heavy drinking) is so important to college women's social status and sense of self-worth that they are willing to risk the potential threat of sexual assault to get it. In other words, within the peer culture of these young women, the risk of sexual violence that is associated with partying is worth it.
This study expands on the existing research in three important ways. First, the focus of this study is on binge-drinking undergraduate women. It is not primarily a study on first year students and/or sororities, which is where much other research focuses. Second, this study uses in-depth qualitative interviews to better understand the meanings and co-constitutive processes people attach to sexual violence. Third, this study focuses on the engagement of binge-drinking undergraduate women with the "slutty" discourse and attempts to manage the risk of sexual violence within the context of campus party culture. All of this is done under the a framework of co-constitutivity and gender construction.
The data for this study are 31 in-depth, semi-structured interviews that took place on the University campus from May to July of 2005 (May through July). I conducted interviews with women aged 18-24 who were undergraduate students at a large, elite, Midwestern University and who self-identified as frequent binge drinkers and participants in campus "party culture."
Greater racial/ethnic diversity was represented in this project than across the campus at large. Of the 31 interviews, 18 (58%) women identified themselves as white or Caucasian. Eleven (35.5%) women identified themselves as Asian or Asian-American, and two (6.5%) identified themselves as Black or African-American.7
Socio-economically, participants were less diverse than the general campus population. Participants were asked to record their estimation of their family household income.8 Only two participants indicated that their families' annual household income was less than $50,000, and only six (including those two) reported annual household incomes of less than $75,000. Twenty-six participants indicated that their mothers' had at least a college education (10 had graduate degrees). Twenty-five participants reported that their fathers' had at least a college education with 17 of them having graduate degrees. Two participants (not the two with the lowest household incomes) reported that their fathers' were not involved in their lives.
The sexual orientation of the women I interviewed was also very homogenous. They all identified as straight or heterosexual. The only variation was one woman who wrote "heterosexual (more nonspecific)."
The participants in this project differed from those in many other studies of campus sexual assault in two ways; age and sorority status. While many studies of campus sexual assault focus on the experience of sorority members (see, for example, Martin and Hummer, 1989; and Boswell and Spade, 1996) the participants in this project were not largely members of sororities. Only four participants (12.9%) were Pan-Hellenic sorority members.9 Interestingly, this is likely an over-representation of sorority members when compared to the campus as a whole, as only 8.5% of first year students anticipated joining a fraternity or sorority (http://www.crlt.umich.edu/gsis/StudentProfileData2004.pdf.).
I recruited participants for this via flyers that I posted in three coffee shops on the University's central campus, and in two large classroom buildings. Due to the sensitive nature of the study, flyers were posted both on designated posting spots and in the stalls of women's restrooms in all locations. The flyers announced a University sponsored study on women's experiences with partying and requested the participation of people who were interested in talking about their experiences with partying (including their perspectives on the risk of sexual assault while partying) and who met the following criteria: 1) female undergraduate students at the university between the ages of 18-25, 2) had at least 4 drinks in a setting at least three times in the last two weeks or 15 times in the last 6 months, and 3) participate in party culture (as defined by participants). Tear-off tabs with my name, email address and phone number were located at the bottom of the flyer. People who were interested in participating were invited to contact me by phone or email. In part because recruitment began just as the traditional academic year was ending and I was concerned about having a difficult time recruiting participants and also because I wanted to be respectful of peoples' busy lives, potential interviewees were offered $25 for being interviewed.
I soon realized that despite my earlier concern, I was not going to have trouble recruiting people to be interviewed. This is largely due to the active academic schedule (a large number of classes offered) of the spring and summer terms. Thus although the population of undergraduates is substantially lower in the spring/summer than it is in the fall, there are still a sizeable number of undergraduate students who stay on or near campus over the summer.
I conducted all of the interviews and followed the outline of an interview schedule with questions about experiences with partying, campus party culture, social relationships and interactions, identity, and risks of party culture, and sexual violence. In keeping with the tradition of qualitative interviewing, all interviews covered all topics, but not every question was asked to every interviewee and interviewees were often asked questions that emerged from the flow of the interview. I began every interview by having participants fill out an informed consent form that described the project and explicitly stated that participants would be asked about their perceptions of the risk of sexual assault (as did the recruitment flyer).
Most of the interviewees appeared excited about being interviewed about their experiences with partying. They commented that they thought it was important for such a common, every-day experience to be studied and analyzed. Binge drinking and using other drugs is unconditionally stigmatized in many segments of society, and was illegal for many of the interviewees (those under age 21). However, partying is such a common and culturally accepted behavior for college students at Universities such as this one that I believe most interviewees felt comfortable talking about their experiences with me. Additionally, we did the interviews in a school building, a place where many students talk with their friends about their social lives and experiences with parties, which might have contributed to their feelings of comfort with the topic.
My location as an interviewer was similar to what Patricia Hill Collins (1990) describes as an outsider within. I was approximately 10 years older than most of the interviewees. I had recently had a baby, who some of them saw me interact with as they were waiting for the interview to begin, and I was marked (via my rings) as married. These identities (older, married, a mom) marked me as a "grown-up" and as distant from the youth that they embodied and that is central to their identities as college students. As such, they were salient in the interview setting. Some similar, if somewhat removed, identities were also salient. Most obviously, I am a woman, as were all of the interviewees.10 Both the interviewees and I were students, albeit I was a student in a doctoral program and they were undergraduate students. Additionally, and perhaps most salient to this project, I also was a frequent binge drinker and participant in party culture as an undergraduate student, although the setting was different both contextually (a small, politically progressive, liberal arts school) and temporally.
This past experience, in addition to academic literature and professional work, provided the "context of discovery" for this project and shaped the questions I explored with interviewees. The interview questions largely remained the same throughout the course of the interviews, with some minor adjustments made to reflect the language of the participants. For example I began asking interviewees about their experiences and relationships with the men they partied with. I changed that language after the first few interviews when I received puzzled looks from interviewees who said, "oh, you mean my guy friends." I realized that the word "men" to these college women implied an older "grown-up," distinct from their age/developmental identity of late adolescence. I then changed my language in interviews and used the word "guy." I also followed the interviewees guide as to whether they referred to them selves as women or as girls.
After we had gone through my questions, I asked participants if they had any questions for me after completing the interview. Many of them reiterated that they were glad the issue was being studied and asked what I thought I would find. I responded that I believe participating in party culture is an experience or behavior that shapes our senses of identity, particularly our identity of ourselves as women. Related to that I expected that our perception of the risk of sexual assault also impacted the way we understand our experiences with partying and our identities and sense of ourselves as women.
Following the completion of the interview, participants were asked to complete a demographics form requesting general background information such as age, year in school, socio-economic class, race, location and type of high school, and sorority membership. They were also offered a list of resources giving contact information to mental health, substance abuse, and sexual violence services. At the very end of the interview I handed participants an envelope with their incentive money, $25 in cash, and told them they could contact me with any additional questions. I also told them that if they had requested I would send them a summary of my findings from the project.
Interviews lasted between 45 minutes and one hour and 45 minutes. Twenty-eight of the 31 interviews were recorded on a digital voice recorder and transcribed for analysis. Extensive field notes were taken on the three interviews that were not recorded, and then transcribed for analysis.
I analyzed the data using a method of open and focused coding (Emerson, Fretz & Shaw, 1995). I initially read through transcripts and field notes from all 31 interviews. On a second read-through of the data I began thematic coding, using NVIVO software.
I began coding with a list of themes suggested from the literature and from my personal and professional experiences. While using these pre-existing themes as a starting-off point, I simultaneously sought out themes that were emerging from the data, making coding an iterative and dynamic process. Anticipated themes included slutty, safety, risk/danger, and heavy drinking. Emergent and unanticipated themes included issues of control, the pleasure of feeling/being sexy within the party scene, and slutty-as-drunk.
Not far into the process of coding, I decided sacrifice breadth for the hope of comprehensible depth (Hurst, 1999), and thus to focus my first paper out of this data on the connections between the "slutty" discourse and perceptions of the risk of sexual assault. To do so I narrowed my general research question from "how is gender constructed among frequently binge drinking women within the campus party scene?" to the more focused questions of "how do college women construct the discourse of 'slutty' "
Armstrong et al. (2005) and Young et al. (2005) argue that despite the well-known dangers that research and conventional wisdom associate with partying, undergraduate women gain pleasure from participating in party culture. My data supports that claim. When asked to name some reasons why women drink every single interview mentioned -- without prompting -- that partying is fun.11
Partying is a normative and highly visible institution at this University. For the women who were interviewed for this study, it is the context in which much of their social lives take place. They describe partying as a strategy for meeting people, a way to lower their inhibitions and allow them to interact freely with people (particularly "guys") they do not know well, and as a vehicle for bonding with their friends.
Sexuality was both a component of partying and source of fun for the women I interviewed. That there is an element of sexuality associated with partying is such a naturalized assumption that it is difficult to find explicit evidence of it. Barring direct statement of the conflation of partying and sexuality, I found evidence of it in two places; 1) the efforts to which women described going in order to create the desired sexy appearance for "going out," and 2) the frequent linkages made between partying and "hooking up,"
When describing how she and her friends get ready to "go out"
The description Sara provided of "getting ready", or at least her feelings behind it, varied somewhat from most of the other interviews. It was reminiscent of both Bartky's (1990) and Fenstermaker and West (2002) conception of femininity, and the accompanying heterosexuality, as an achievement or accomplishment to which others hold women. She described a similar process of getting ready to go out, but attributed the way she was constructing her appearance to expectations place upon her. "If I'm going clubbing, then it's like a skirt or like a tight shirt or something like that...I feel like they expect you to dress more like provocatively. And it's kind of there's like definitely a sexual element to it." Anne expressed a similar sentiment:
Among the women I interviewed, whether explicitly acknowledged or implicitly suggested, partying is constructed as a combination of alcohol and (hetero)sexuality. Much of their mental energy regarding partying is focused on whether they are going out to try to meet someone, if they will "hook up" with someone that night, and how to read the sexualized attention they receive from men. The following words from Mary demonstrate the foregrounding of sexuality within party culture:
The discourse of heterosexualized interaction and partying is an important, and neglected, site of gender (re)production. My data show that women who participate in party culture conceive of (and thus construct) guys as being more focused on "hooking up" than women.
Julie explained this by stating that many guys "have an agenda," as Clarissa said, with a laugh, when guys go out they "plan on getting drunk and plan on getting laid."
Armstong et al. (2005) theorize that college women who participate in the party scene interpret their knowledge and familiarity with the "givens" of party culture as a skill of which they should be proud. Similarly, I found that being able to navigate the party scene, in which it is expected that men are partying with the intention or goal of "getting laid" implies a level of sophistication. This can be seen in the apparent nonchalance of Dana, a long-time (since early high school) participant in party culture and a graduating senior:
Her repeated and unprovoked insistence that the behavior of "guys on the prowl" does not offend her is notable; suggesting that not being offended by the sexually aggressive behavior present in party culture may be a skill in which she is accomplished, and of which she is proud.
Taken together, the individual data from these interviews demonstrate that within the social/peer context of those who participate in party culture, the relationship between partying and sexuality is naturalized to such an extent that sexuality appears to be inherent within party culture. Within this context, sexuality and partying can be understood as co-constitutive. They are separate institutions whose meaning is constructed through interaction with each other. The constitutive link between sexuality and partying is strong, and it provides fertile ground for the "slutty" discourse.
The discourse of "sluttiness" is important to conceptualizations of female sexuality. Sexuality scholarship indicates that women and girls of a variety of race, nation, and class backgrounds, actively work to construct their own identities and sexualities in opposition to being "slutty" (see, for example, Martin, 2005; Schalet, Hunt, and Joe-Laidler, 2003; and Stombler, 1994). "Sluttiness" is the negative referent against which respectable and controlled sexuality is compared.
College women who participate in party culture must negotiate the powerful, pervasive, and stigmatizing cultural assumption that "drunk girls are slutty." Consistent with the literature on sexuality, the most common way the women I interviewed engaged with the "sluttiness" discourse was to define themselves in opposition to it. Calling upon the stereotype of sorority girls as "sororowhores" or "sorostitutes", and distancing themselves (or groups to which they belong) from behavior attributed to girls "like that" was a common method of engagement with the "slutty" discourse. Examples of this run through my data. The following illustrates a few versions of this stereotype:
That the women I interviewed would participate in the construction of women -- particularly sorority women -- who participate in party culture as "slutty," was an unsurprising finding. Also unsurprising was that the women I interviewed explicitly distanced themselves from that which they understood as "slutty." What was surprising, was that data from these interviews suggests a necessary (for this population) component to slutty -- "too much" or "excessive" drinking.
Although "slutty" has typically been defined as a woman who has sexual relationships with many different men in a short period of time, and/or engages in sexual activity with men without emotional involvement, data from this paper show a different definition in operation among the binge drinking college women I interviewed. The women I interviewed interact with and construct a definition of "sluttiness" that is based on a combination of a woman's sexiness and "too much" or "out-of-control" drinking. Sexiness (which, as the previous section of this paper demonstrated, is constructed as always present in both party culture and the women who participate in party culture) combined with "too much" drinking creates "sluttiness." In another form: (DRINKING) + (sexiness) = Sluttiness.
This construction of sluttiness as conflated with drinking or partying too much can be seen throughout the data. Anne's words demonstrate engagement with the "slutty" discourse in two ways. She both participates in the construction of partying as constitutive of "sluttiness," and others "those" girls who are in the crowd that parties a lot who -- unlike she and her friends -- are "sluts."
Helen articulated a more internalized and self-referential perspective regarding the relationship between alcohol and "sluttiness" that was rooted in her Korean background.
In contrast to Anne, Kim, and Laura, in this quote Helen is not explicitly distancing herself from other women in her peer group who she defines as "slutty." When differentiating herself from women with stigmatized identities and sexualities, Helen has two reference groups; the "slutty party girl" one that she shares with Anne, Kim, and Laura, and (perhaps particularly Korean) prostitutes. Helen is participating in constructing an additional group of women -- prostitutes -- as "other."
Importantly, as a Korean-American college student, Helen is shaped not only by images and messages from her Korean cultural background, but also by those from her active participation in campus party culture at a prototypical "American" college. As such, and as is demonstrated in the following quote, she must engage with the "slutty" discourse that is dominate within campus party culture. Her words here show her interpretation, and construction, of partying primarily, and (assumed) sexual behavior secondarily, as constitutive of "sluttiness."
An informative account of the perceived relationship between women (particularly sorority women) who party, sluttiness, sexuality, and vulnerability can be seen in Jen's words. In a few phrases she makes clear the connections the elements of campus party culture that create the context of danger for women who party. Her words also illustrate the way in which women who party -- and are thus themselves vulnerable to the same stereotypes being applied to the sorority women -- distance themselves from the "sororowhore" image and "other" those who fit that description.
The following excerpt is Jen's response to one of the questions I asked every interviewee "What do you think, in general, of women who party?"
The richness of Jen's words lend themselves to more in-depth and focused analysis. Jen framed initial response to my question of what she thought of women who party in a negative tone. She did not call up positive images of fun, attractive women bonding with close friends, being social, or relieving stress. Instead she operated from what social work refers to as "a deficit perspective," calling forth a particular -- and negative -- vision of women who party as irresponsible women who do not have control over themselves. Jen explicitly stated that although she disrespects this lack of control in anyone, she holds a particular place of disrespect for women who lack control "because they are more vulnerable."
Her disrespect of vulnerability -- particularly in women -- can be seen mid-way through the excerpt of her interview when she sets up a juxtaposition between women who are "responsible" (the ones she respects) and those who are not (the ones she does not respect). According to Jen, women who dress provocatively (except for her) put themselves in danger because they might drink too much. This contrast is targeted less toward women who do not dress provocatively than she does to women who do not drink. She specifically says "I don't disrespect girls who dress provocatively if they are responsible." And she defines responsible by "limiting how much you drink, knowing who is getting your drinks, and having friends or someone you trust do it [get the drinks]."
It appears that she believes dressing provocatively (or "sexy") by itself is not necessarily risky. She also appears to believe that there ways to drink that are not necessarily risky. It is the combination of both drinking (particularly "too much" drinking) and dressing provocatively that she believes is truly productive of vulnerability for women. Too much drinking combined with too much sexiness (dressing provocatively and participating in party culture) is dangerous for women.
Jen uses -- exactly -- the same language to construct vulnerability among women who party that I used earlier to describe the construction of "sluttiness" engaged in by (for example) Helen, Anne, Kim, and Laura. For Jen, DRINKING + sexiness = Vulnerability. This is an interesting and important similarity. "Sluttiness" and vulnerability are constituted by the same elements. As such, they are largely conflated within campus party culture. Perhaps more accurately, within campus party culture "slutty" is code for "vulnerable."
When I asked Jen to clarify what she believed drinking and dressing provocatively made women vulnerable to, she responded without hesitation, "Having sex." This choice of words is very telling. Throughout the process of interviewing women for this study I heard many references to women being vulnerable, or "getting into bad situations" or having "something bad happen." When pressed for clarification they most often looked at me as though they were somewhat irritated at having to say the words, or perhaps even think them at all, then eventually said "sexual assault", or, sometimes "rape." Jen, however, said "having sex."
It is possible that she really meant "having sex" was what women who dressed provocatively and had "too much" to drink were at risk for. Mainstream substance abuse prevention in schools, and in public service announcements on television, radio, billboards, etc., does teach people that good judgment is a casualty of having too much to drink. Perhaps she was thinking that the ability to make good judgments is what normally prevents women from having sex, and therefore loosing the ability to make good judgments would prevent women from being able to decide not to have sex. This seems highly unlikely.
It seems much more likely that what Jen was thinking when she said women are made more vulnerable to "having sex" was "being raped." For Jen, "vulnerable" is code for "rape-able." By simple extension of logic, if "slutty" is code for "vulnerable" and "vulnerable" is code for "rape-able," then "slutty" is code for "rape-able." To return to equation form: If Slut = Vulnerable, and Vulnerable = Rape-able, then Slut = Rape-able.
Melissa explicitly made this connection in my interview with her. When asked what she thought, in general, of women who drink, she responded by saying:
As with the earlier excerpt from my interview with Jen, this section of my interview with Melissa is incredibly rich, and draws connections between phenomena often only suggested through subtext and insinuation. Melissa unhesitatingly calls upon dominant discourses regarding the causes of sexual assault, namely that men can be so "tempted" by attractive ("temptingly" dressed) women that they "can't stop themselves" from raping women, or that women are responsible for being raped if they wear short skirts (are dressed like a slut.) The causal link between appearing to be slutty and the risk of sexual assault was also acknowledged by Cassie, who described consciously strategizing to make her self less sexy in attempt to be safer.
As Cassie and Melissa articulated so well, there is a culturally constructed image that women who appear "slutty" are at risk of rape. "slutty"
As I have shown throughout this paper, in the data from interviews with Helen, Anne, Kim, Laura, Jen, Melissa, and Cassie, the women I interviewed actively constructed "slutty" girls as "other" from themselves. They defined themselves and their activity in opposition to that (and those girls) which they perceived to be "slutty." I believe they did this in part to feel safe from the risk of sexual assault, and safely distant from the women who were at risk for or were actually sexually assaulted.
Sexual assault is both an individual and cultural a phenomenon; one that Catherine MacKinnon has likened to terrorism. In the introduction to Feminism Unmodified, (1987) she wrote the following:
The language used by the women I interviewed is, fittingly, somewhat modified from that used by MacKinnon. They use code language of "vulnerable" and "slutty", but the process and the result is the same as described by MacKinnon. Jen says that she disrespects women who drink excessively and who wear provocative clothing such as short skirts and tight, low-cut tops, because that makes women "more vulnerable." And Melissa talks about girls who are "slutty, wasted, and... prey for a predator." Jen and Melissa, as MacKinnon suggested, have been using the information available to them through dominant discourses to understand who is at risk for rape, and they are attempting "not to be her."
Another way in which women attempt to define themselves away from being at risk of rape is to engage with the "blaming the victim" discourse in which victims are blamed and held responsible for the crimes that are perpetrated against them. The following words describe the process Amy went through after learning that a friend had been raped.
The end of this quote from Amy is an excellent example of the "blaming the victim" discourse. When Amy says the she has not changed how she parties because she "know[s] what's going on around her" and thus "wouldn't put [herself] in that situation," she is framing herself in contrast to her friend who was raped. Amy is thus implicitly blaming her both for putting herself in a situation where she was vulnerable to being raped, and for being raped. Again, Amy uses code language by stating that she wouldn't put herself "in that situation"; avoiding using the word rape when she refers to herself.
Erin provides another example, another perspective, of how women blame each other for being victimized.
In slightly different ways, both Erin and Amy are attempting (to use MacKinnon's analogy) to make the random appear systematic. They are, as are most of the women I interviewed, attempting to delineate the types of people, circumstances, and behaviors in which rape does or does not happen. If, as Erin says "we choose to put ourselves in those situations" then we can avoid rape by choosing not to put ourselves in "those" rape-producing situations. We can also explain why some women (who are/look/act differently than we do) are raped. This process creates an image of rape as systematic and not random. And it allows some women to feel safe from the risk of rape.
One of the reasons that the women I interviewed judged other women and/or blamed them for being sexually assaulted was that these other(ed) women did not adhere to unstated (and remarkably uniform) rules of safe partying. Women utilized many different strategies for maintaining safety, or as they would say "avoiding bad situations" in the context of partying. They identified strategies such as monitoring their alcohol intake, holding on to their drinks (to avoid "roofies" or date-rape drugs), and regulating what they (and their friends) wear to certain parties or bars. These were all common strategies. However, two "rules of safe partying" emerged from the data as nearly universal. The first was to party with friends and/or people they knew. The second was to watch out for each other.
Despite a generation of sexual assault prevention and education that has stressed the far greater likelihood of being raped by a close friend, family member, or acquaintance, the myth of the predatory stranger rape has not been dispelled. The women I interviewed consistently said they felt safe because they partied with their friends and people they knew, but many said they were afraid when walking home after dark. These two contrasting views of safety and danger are presented below. First, Aditi expresses her fears of walking home alone at night.
Next Soon-yi articulated the more commonly voiced perspective that described safety as being around friend(s):
Although in a different context, Anne articulated a similar sense of safety because she parties among friends. She gave the following response to my query regarding her thoughts about whether women who party are at increased risk for rape and/or sexual assault
Both Anne and Soon-yi explicitly say that they do not feel at risk of sexual assault because they only party with their friends, and/or they do not party with strangers. They appear to make the assumption that only strangers -- never friends -- might assault them. If they do not party with strangers then they will be safe from sexual assault. Two things are interesting about this perspective. One is that it is (if one believes the statistics) inaccurate that people are at more risk from strangers than friends or acquaintances. Instead, many studies have demonstrated that women are at much greater risk of sexual assault at the hands of people they know and/or trust, than they are of stranger rape (Koss, 1995; DeKeseredy, 1995.)
Begging the question of what consequences might arise from women utilizing a strategy to stay safe, and assuming a safe space, that in reality could conceivably put her at higher risk of assault. As a member of a tight-knit club on campus, Jen gave me an example of that potentially problematic sense of safety in (small) numbers. She told me she does not feel at risk from sexual assault.
Jen believes that no one within her "smaller community" of people who are in this club would assault a woman in the club, because the social cost too him would be too high. She appears to assume that if one of the guys in the club assaulted one of the girls in the club, that other people in the club would find out-and that they would care and/or do something if they did find out. In addition, her assumption is contrary to Koss's (1985) work in which she found that 42% of people who identified as being a victim of sexual assault on her survey had never told anyone else.
The second interesting issue regarding safety and partying with friends is the way in which the women I interviewed conceived of "friend." For the purposes of partying and feeling safe while partying, the women I interviewed seemed to conflate the concept of "friend" with anyone who fell within a network of friends who are friends and/or acquaintances with each other.17 And for the women I interviewed, that network of friends often seemed to cover most of the people who participated in campus party culture -- quite a wide network. People who were considered not safe to party with generally were older, or not students, or "townies" who are not affiliated with the university.
In addition to strategizing for safety by partying with friends and acquaintances, nearly every woman I interviewed talked about using a strategy of "watching out for each other." This most often took one of two forms, either watching who friends talked to at the party or bar, and preventing friends from leaving the party or bar with someone deemed inappropriate. In the first case, friends would watch out for each other by monitoring who friends were talking to at a party or bar, and for how long. This allows friends to intervene into a conversation if it appeared that another friend was talking with someone they did not want to be talking with. This was seen as an act of assistance in terms of being able to get away from men the women I interviewed (and their friends) did not want to talk to at a party or bar. It was also seen as a safety precaution that would help keep friends from getting in to "a bad situation" with a strange (unknown) guy. As Erin said, "I have really good friends that would stop you or stop each other from talking to some sketchy guy in the corner." Very often the women I interviewed had elaborate systems of communication with their roommates and friends to signal their need for assistance in extricating themselves from a conversation at a party or bar. These signals included eye signals, minor head gestures, waves, and the very common grabbing of a friends' hand and pulling while saying "will you come to the bathroom with me."
The other form that "watching out for each other" took was intervening if a friend appeared to be leaving the party or bar with someone she was not "supposed" to leave with. This could include ex-boyfriends, ex-"hook-ups," or -- the worst possibility -- strangers. This intervention was sometimes described as "the buddy system" in which people who went to the party together agreed to leave the party together -- unless something (the right guy) came up. Monica describes this phenomenon, including the hierarchy of who it would be appropriate for a friend to leave a party/bar with in the following quote.
Despite the quotes here from Erin and Monica that suggest an effective method of "watching out for each other" that helps keep women who party safe, this strategy and ones like it are ultimately not very helpful or effective. The watching out for each other strategy falls apart quite frequently. As often happens when combined with (often heavy) drinking, a friend could step out of sight to get a drink, or go to the bathroom, or pursue their own social/sexual agenda at a party or bar, and then not be around to fulfill the social requirement to "watch out" for another friend.
Similarly, as I said earlier, partying with friends and staying away from strangers is likely a similarly ineffective strategy for avoiding rape and sexual assault. Research strongly suggests that friends (and family) are often the very people one must "watch out for" the most, for they are the ones most likely to commit sexual assault.
In addition, both of these "safety" strategies that were most often offered up as options by the women I interviewed, place a great deal of blame and responsibility on the victim. This is logical, if problematic. If one is to blame for a situation occurring, it implies that there was something, and is something in the future, that the person could do to prevent it from happening again. Unfortunately, these strategies largely ignore the impact of larger social structures -- likely because changing the larger social structure appears much, much more difficult than making small individual level change. The result is that women are (sometimes unintentionally) held to blame for their own actions, for the actions of the people who assaulted them, and for the larger social structures that support gender-based inequality and violence.
This has tremendous costs to women who are sexually assaulted. When the predominant reaction to rape and sexual assault is to blame the victim for allowing (or asking for) it to occur, a hostile and unsupportive environment for victims exist. In 1999 Schwartz and Leggett published findings of a study showing that the single best predictor of whether a rape victim develops traumatic symptoms (symptoms that meet the DSM-IV definition of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder) following the rape, is the reaction of her social support network -- her (usually female) friends. Women whose friends and family suggest that they might have been in some way responsible for causing the assault, or at least for not preventing it, are far more likely to experience emotional trauma than are people who received instant support and encouragement from their friends and family. There are consequences for women of living in a world where women denigrate other women and blame "slutty" women for being raped in attempt to define themselves out of danger.
This is not a new problem. In writing of the tendency of women to distance themselves from victims of rape and sexual assault by othering victims, Catharine MacKinnon writes: "The problem is, combining even a few circumstances, descriptions, conditions, and details of acts of sexual abuse reveals that no woman has a chance." She eloquently, if somewhat pessimistically, argues that the lines in the sand that women draw to distinguish themselves from rape victims are ineffective, because the slightest change to those lines causes the distinction between safe and not safe to disappear. As Dorothy Allison wrote in 1984, "No one is safe, because we have not made each other safe."
Four important findings emerged out of the data for this study. The first is that sexuality has been socially constructed to appear as a natural and inherent and invisible component of sexuality. This information allows for better understanding of what "partying" means, and the ways in which participants in party culture receive pleasure from participating in it.
This initial finding is related to the second, and perhaps most important finding. This finding has to do with a clarified and specific conceptualization of "slutty." Through analysis of data from my 31 interviews it became clear that the popular conception of a "slutty" as a woman who has sex with many different men in a relatively short period of time without a necessary or strong emotional attachment to the men involved (Stombler, 1994; Armstrong et. al, 2005), is not the definition of slut at work in the culture of the women I interviewed. For the women I interviewed, drinking is a necessary component of "sluttiness." In fact, for those women involved in party culture, with the presumption of sexuality as a natural and obvious component of party culture, drinking -- particularly drinking too much -- is what makes a woman slutty.
This study also shows that the binge-drinking undergraduate women who participate in party culture, construct and are thus constructed by, the image of sluttiness as both a result of drinking "too much" and a risk of sexual assault. For the women I interviewed, drinking is sluttiness, and sluttiness is the risk of sexual assault. "Slutty" is code for rape-able.
As a reaction to the risk of sexual assault associated with "slutty" women, slutty women and those perceived to be slutty women are constructed as "other." The women I interviewed engaged with the "slutty" discourse by actively distancing themselves from the "slutty" party girls -- particularly the sorority girls. They also distanced themselves from rape victims by creating unspoken rules for partying which, if obeyed, would theoretically protect women from rape. Those who did not follow the rules were stigmatized.
Finally, there is a high cost to the practice of blaming rape victims for being raped, and for creating flawed mechanisms (such as unspoken rules for partying) in which women can imagine they are safe from the risk of rape and sexual assault. The consequences of "othering" women who appear at risk for sexual assault creates a tremendous burden for women who are actually sexually assaulted and high rates of psychological and psychic distress.
This study has direct and important implications for feminist theory and practice. Perhaps most obviously, this study shows the desperate need for feminist theorizing on the experience of partying. The area is on rich theoretical grounds, with potentially insightful and expansive connections to be drawn to gender identity, sexuality, sexual violence, the body, and the classic pleasure/danger debate. There is a deafening silence around issues of partying in feminist and sexuality theorizing. Theoretical activity in that area could enrich and expand the scope and reach of feminist theory.
The implications of this study for feminist practice and intervention are equally rich. This study shows a disturbing conflation of the stigmatized label of "slutty" and perception of the risk of sexual assault. Relatedly, this study expands our understanding of the processes, causes, and consequences of women's judgment of women who are, or appear at risk for, sexual assault. This process of othering should be deconstructed and incorporated in all anti-sexual violence prevention and training. It seems possible that including making people aware of the active role they play in stigmatizing victims of sexual assault, and the reasons that they do so (to attempt to feel safe from risk of sexual assault) might reduce stigma, ultimately resulting in a more supportive environment for victims of sexual assault.
Finally, this research suggests the need to disentangle the concepts of partying and 'sluttiness'. We need to work to promote a cultural image that being drunk does not mean being always already willing for sex. There is no reason that this message should not be as important in promoting healthy sexuality and sexual assault prevention as the recent anti-date-rape-drug campaigns that remind women to always know where their drinks are. It is evidence of the stigma associated with partying, and use of alcohol and drugs, that feminist scholarship has not taken up these issues. I believe active feminist engagement with issues of partying, sexuality, and sexual violence could make the world safer and more fun for us all.

Progress through an academic system can be seen as a series of transitions in which each transition in the academic life-course is conditional on the outcome of the previous one, and individuals and their families (consciously or unconsciously) rationally estimate the likely outcomes of future transitions based on the transitions they have already made. For instance, the choice to attend academic rather than technical high school precedes the decision whether or not to enroll in college, and less advantaged students might estimate lower future performance in school as well as lower future returns to academic high school in comparison with technical high school. Social (dis)advantage is thus a cumulative process of tracking experienced across many transitions (Breen and Goldthorpe 1997). The relationship between educational attainment and social origins has been shown to depend on the distribution of schooling in the population as well as on the effect of social origins on the likelihood of making a particular transition to schooling (Mare 1981). Although almost every country has experienced a major expansion of education in the last 50 years, class differences in transition rates have remained relatively stable over time even while gender disparities have declined (Breen and Goldthorpe 1997). Much of educational stratification research has assumed continuous or near-continuous educational paths as normative, although it is known that educational disruptions can have substantial negative outcomes.
But what happens when individuals who seem to be on one trajectory or have already left school wish to increase their educational attainment? Elman and O'Rand (2004) visualize three pathways of educational attainment: one of early education to advantaged persons (cumulative advantage), early school exits resulting in low wages for the least advantaged, and a third pathway of late education to those in the middle, who attend school in later life without experiencing the benefits associated with earlier attainment. As the proportion of a population participating in higher education changes, more adults may re-enter the school system. Indeed, education in later life is becoming more common in industrialized (Hamil-Luker and Uhlenbert 2002) as well as some developing countries (Qian 1994-5).
The proportion of the Chinese population with tertiary education has always been small relative to the entire population, but has fluctuated widely and is now rapidly expanding. Chinese education policy in the twentieth century has been subject to major swings accompanying shifts in the state's view of national development (Tsang 2000). In the 15 years after the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, the number of graduates of four-year universities increased by almost 10-fold as the central government concentrated on urban development, despite a slow-down during the Great Leap Forward (1958-1960) as the educational focus shifted to basic education in rural areas (Hannum and Xie 1994). In the mid-1960's, the debate about national development centered on whether to encourage egalitarianism or focus resources whether they would be most effective (i.e. higher education that would produce experts who could stimulate the economy.)
Poor economic progress during these years led to a return at the close of the Cultural Revolution to an emphasis on science and education in order to achieve modernization. In the reform period, status differences are to be tolerated as incentives, and a technocratic elite is essential to improving material resources for all. Since the early 1980's, the Chinese post-secondary educational system has still been characterized by a limited supply, due to comparatively low government investment in education compared with similar developing countries (Heckman 2003). The education system has been under enormous pressure throughout, with tens of examinees, including high school students, perennial examinees, and employed persons, for every enrollment slot in higher educational institutions. Just after the Cultural Revolution ended, competition was especially intense, as urban youths who had been sent down to rural areas returned to their cities and were allowed to take the college entrance examination from 1977-1981. During the reform period, an expansion in irregular and formal adult education has helped to relieve some of the pressure (Qian 1994-5, Xiao and Tsang 1999).
Traditionally stratification and education researchers have held that very few persons who had already entered the work force passed the examination, while those who few who did obtain higher education did so through irregular means such as television or correspondence schools (Qian 1994-5). However, higher education to adults in China has rarely been examined. Research on delayed education has focused on the youths who were sent-down from urban to rural areas during the Cultural Revolution (Xie and Jiang, forthcoming, Zhou and Hou 1999, Deng and Treiman 1997, Giles, Park, and Zhang 2003). The sent-down youth were exempted from age limits on the exams between 1977-8 and 1981. Coming from another perspective, Li and Walder (2001) have pointed out the importance of the timing of party membership, as promising young people who are selected for party membership increase their chances of receiving a college education mid-career in a system of "sponsored mobility" so that the relationship between party membership and higher education is ambiguous.
Figure 2 plots individuals' ages at graduation by level for the highest strata of educational attainment, university graduates, sorting by age at completion of primary school, then middle school, then academic high school, then university (SURFL data, see below). Many university graduates had not completed certain educational levels which usually would be considered prerequisites for college, such as middle school or academic
high school. More interesting, even for these high achievers there is almost no normative age to complete a given level, with significant variation even at the primary school level accounting for some, but not all of the variation in timing of college graduation. Still, disruptions at earlier levels are substantial, so party-sponsored mobility cannot fully explain the variation in college timing either.
For the most part, researchers on social stratification in China have treated higher education earned in various years as equivalent, and have very rarely even collected data on year of graduation, with the implicit assumption that education is mostly a continuous process, although this is clearly not the case. Although Li and Walder (2001) discuss adult education, Meng and Gregory (2002) are perhaps the first to point out that education cannot be assumed to be continuous in the Chinese context. Focusing on the income effects of missed schooling and non-traditional primary and secondary curricula during the Cultural Revolution, they look at university entry age, defined as the respondent's age in 1978 for Cultural Revolution and year of turning 18 for other cohorts. They find a U-shape for probability of obtaining a bachelor's degree, with those 18 at the time of first examination having a probability over .12, a probability around .02 for 25-year-olds, and above .07 for those 31 at the time of their first examination. For "semi-degrees," a combination of junior college and correspondence degrees, the probability of enrollment by age is actually higher for those 29-31 in 1978 than for 18-year-olds, but the effect of age is smaller. The effect of missed schooling is found to be strongest for those who were between 23 and 26 at the time exams resumed in 1978 and had missed the most years of junior and senior high school combined. They also found that marriage before the first possible examination had a strong negative effect on enrollment for women. The groups who experience the most delay in education were those whose parents were less-educated and had lower occupational status, and this effect of having less-educated parents was stronger for women. Finally, the effect of missed schooling, especially high school, was more important than examination delay.
While Meng and Gregory (2002) assume disruptions to have occurred at uniform times for all respondents, Giles, Park, and Zhang (forthcoming) calculate city-wide birth cohort disruptions to education from individual start dates at various levels and assign those to individuals within the area to avoid correlations between individual characteristics and disruptions. They claim youth returning from having been sent down sat for the competitive merit-based college entrance exams between 1977 and 1981, while Meng and Gregory used 1978 as the date of the first exam. They calculate the average delay in starting various educational levels, as well as average attainment of those levels, by birth year for five cities, as well as correlations between disruptions and attainment by level. For the time being, we do not attempt to model the timing of disruptions, although we include a dummy variable for sent-down youths.
These studies have treated delayed education and age variation in education as purely a result of the Cultural Revolution. This paper argues, however, that the phenomenon of interrupted education is not limited to the Cultural Revolution; that the trend is in fact continuing among those coming of age during the reform period as well. Figure 3 shows 1990 and 2000 census data for college degrees from regular institutions of higher learning (bachelor's and graduate degrees) by age in 1990. For those in their mid-twenties through mid-forties in 1990, almost half of the college degrees were earned between the 1990 and 2000 censuses. Persons age 18-22 during the Cultural Revolution years of 1966-1976 would have been 32-46 in 1990. As expected, the 1990 census shows
a large drop in the number and percentage with degrees around age 46, with the 2000 census showing that much of this decline has been compensated for with late degrees. But the proportion is the same and the number of late graduates is much larger for those less than 32 in 1990; the percentage of 35-year-old males in 2000 with degrees was almost twice that of 25-year-old males in 1990, although that cohort is too young to have missed school during the Cultural Revolution. Clearly, college education after age 25 is commonplace for younger groups as well. Furthermore, given that 1971-5 are the years when the fewest students graduated due to school closings, we would expect that those 18-22 in 1971-5, or 35-41 in 1990, would have the highest levels of delayed schooling. However, the highest levels of delayed schooling appear to occur for those in their mid to late twenties in 1990. Paradoxically, educational attainment for men over 45 in 1990 is slightly lower in the 2000 census than in the 1990 census; this paradox is further amplified in the cohort percentages. The reasons for this discrepancy are not clear.
Similarly, late junior college degrees are noticeable until the late fifties, close to traditional retirement age, consistent with the comparatively lower financial and academic burden and easier enrollment process for older graduates who would have less time to enjoy the higher returns of a university education. Respondents born in 1965, too late to have missed years of schooling in the Cultural Revolution, earned about half of the junior college degrees they held by age 35 after age 25, and it is reasonable to think that this cohorts' attainment will increase by the 2010 census. Also striking in view of the gender structure of university degrees is the indication that junior college degrees are approaching gender parity for younger cohorts. One source of confusion shows up for
females over 40. Although the 2000 census counts more junior college graduates than the 1990 census at every age, the 2000 census counted far more people at those ages, resulting in a crossover of the percentages educated in those years. Although readers should add imaginary wide error bars to these graphs due to the difficulty of enumerating China's population, measurement error cannot be imagined to be large enough to explain
away the findings. Figure 5 sums the cohort numbers and percentages with university or junior college education to find the overall cohort figures for higher education. The problems with the percentages for older respondents in the 1990 census are compounded in this overall data.
There is a noticeable gender gap in educational attainment in China, but this problem is mitigated by late degree attainment. Figure 6 shows the ratio of degrees held by cohort and sex in 2000 to 1990. Although fewer total degrees or late degrees are awarded to women, a slightly higher proportion of women's degrees are earned late. This is striking in view of Meng and Gregory's 2002 finding that women who were married at the time the college entrance exam was first available to them were much less likely than unmarried women to enter college. Around 90% of women are married by age 27.
This study uses the 1999 Study of Urban Residents' Family Life, representative of adults in Shanghai, Wuhan, and Xi'an, which are all large cities. The survey design consists of a matched-pair sample of elders and one of their adult children living in the same city, as well as a general sample aged 16-95, yielding an overall sample of 4,444 respondents. Questions speak primarily to the individual's economic condition, family, time use, satisfaction with China's economic and societal development, and attitudes about family formation and roles.
Because our survey data come from large cities, we face bias resulting from selective migration into cities by more talented individuals and selective migration away from cities by less talented graduates. Educational attainment and income vary widely by region in China (Xie and Hannum 1996). Few graduates live in rural areas, although many live in towns. Migrants and non-migrant graduates may also differ in occupation or other characteristics. Due to the lack of information on age of graduation in nationally representative surveys, and like many other studies, we merely note this problem in passing. However, perhaps because of small sample size, and perhaps because of migration, city to city comparisons were not consistently significant (not shown).
Like studies of income returns to education, our survey contains two categories of higher education, which we call "universit"y and "junior college". For some reason, the SURFL specifies that transfer students are not included as university students. Unfortunately, the SURFL, like other studies of higher education in China (Giles, Park, and Zhang, forthcoming, Meng and Gregory, 2002) combines a wide variety of higher education options, from television and correspondence schools to formal 2 and 3 year degrees (Qian 1994-5) into the junior college category, which Meng and Gregory call a "semi-degree." These degrees may or may not vary in terms of knowledge gained and labor market outcomes. In addition, a small proportion of university graduates also hold junior college degrees or graduate degrees. Because we are interested in the hazard of first entrance into any kind of higher education, we combine all kinds of higher education, and in the case of multiple degrees, we use the respondent's year of starting the first tertiary degree. However, we do not count a respondent who has a graduate degree but never enrolled in junior college or university.
Most obviously, early and late graduates enroll at different points in their life course. Overall, 621 respondents attended higher education; 419 attended junior college and 214 attended university. The mean age of graduation from university is 24.6 with a standard deviation of 3.9, while the mean age of graduation from junior college is 27.8 with a standard deviation of 8.1. Figure 7 is a histogram of age at graduation for junior college and university graduates. The age structure for junior college attendance is wider, and most later graduates attended junior college, while university graduates are more
tightly clustered at earlier ages. The oldest junior college graduates worked between two and ten years between graduation and retirement, allowing little time to reap the rewards of their investment. Overall, 40% of university graduates and 50% of junior college graduates finished after age 25, with 8% and 30% graduating after age 30, respectively.
As seen in the census data, there is a strong gender gap in higher educational attainment in China. Overall, men are almost twice as likely to graduate, regardless of age or graduation timing. This effect is compounded as women graduates are less likely to be party members and less likely to be cadres even if they are party members. Only about a third (33.8%) of the sample of university graduates is female consistent with the proportion of female graduates in the 2000 census data (34.9%). In the reform period, the Chinese Communist Party has sought to recruit talented and highly educated individuals, as well as facilitating the education of those who already belong to the party (Li and Walder 2005, Hauser 2003). About 40% of the on-time grads and 60% of the late grads are party members.
The gender gap mentioned above is compounded by its interaction with party membership; only one third of female college graduates in the sample are party members, while more than half of male graduates had joined the party. Of 191 college graduates, about half (95) were cadres in the jobs they had held the longest, with 30 below and 37 at first (keji) level, 24 at the second (chuji) level, and 4 at the third (juji) level or above. Only 32% of women were cadres, with none at the third (juji) level or above, although 58% of men were cadres.
Wu and Xie (2003) show the importance of occupational sector change in change in returns to income. Obtaining higher education might be one important pathway to exit the state sector or change careers, given China's high job stability. As expected, late graduates were more likely to have changed sectors: 85% of on-time and 63% of late graduates last worked in the same sector as their first job. Job sector itself should also have a cause and effect relationship with educational attainment (Xiao and Tsang 1999).
Delayed education has traditionally been associated with the send-down experience and the Cultural Revolution. But only 20% of late grads (compared to 6% of on-time grads) were 18-24 in 1971, the year of lowest college enrollment during the Cultural Revolution. Having been sent-down to a rural area to work for a period of years has a more straightforward relationship to educational delay. Only 29% of graduates after age 24 (compared to 10% of on-time grads or 17% total) had ever been sent-down. Social origin is likely to have a quite strong relationship with educational attainment. Parents from advantaged occupations may have social connections useful in encouraging their childrens' education. More educated parents may be able to help mitigate disruptions in formal education and help their children prepare for examinations. However, educational attainment may not be a completely straightforward outcome for parents' either. In addition, mothers' and fathers' characteristics are strongly correlated.
Stratification researchers have been most interested in the effect of delayed education on income returns to education. A simple plot of income for respondents below and above age 25 at graduation (not shown) reveals the expected answer: 'on-time' graduates have a wider distribution of incomes and are more likely to be in the highest income quartile, while graduates after age 25 have a more compact income distribution.
Given the differences among early and late graduates, it would be useful to know what factors are associated with enrollment in higher education at three age groups. I employ multivariate logistic regressions in a discrete-time hazard analysis to estimate the relationship between respondents' characteristics and the timing of college. The unit of analysis is the person-year of exposure to enrollment in higher education. The dataset contains multiple observations for each respondent such that the dependent variable for each year prior to enrollment is coded 0, and each year after enrollment is coded 1. For respondents who had not enrolled in higher education by 1999, the year of data collection, the dependent variable for all person-years is coded 0.
I dropped respondents who had not graduated from at least one secondary school level, as they were likely at very low risk of enrollment (lower middle school, vocational high school, or academic high school). This left 413 respondents who had ever been junior college students and 209 who had been university students, as well as 515 respondents who had attained some secondary education and thus theoretically could have taken the college entrance examination. Respondents who graduated before 1949 are also excluded, with the idea that factors associated with college enrollment might have changed after the revolution, and because they do not tend to be in the 1999 labor market.
Factors associated with the hazard of entering higher education are presented at three age groups: enrollment by age 25, by age 34, and by age 43. In each period, respondents who graduated from college in the previous periods are removed from the sample because they are no longer eligible to enroll for the first time. This results in a changing sample for each group; descriptive statistics are shown in Appendix A. The proportion male declines across periods as men disproportionately enroll, but the proportion with party membership increases due to late enrollment. While 43% of the sample enrolled in higher education by age 25, if they had not enrolled by 34 they had only a 6% chance of doing so by age 43. The small number of respondents in the sample with higher education in this sample, as in any sample available to the researchers, results in a general problem of small sample size. For this reason, we have chosen to create two separate models, one including factors related to labor market experience, and one related to family and life-course events.
Model 1 shows the association of labor market factors with the hazard of college enrollment in various life stages. Men are more likely to obtain higher education in China. Consistent with Figure 6, however, the effect of male sex in Model 1 seems to be significant and larger for on-time enrollment, so that males are 1.65 times as likely as females to enroll by 25. Those who were party members by age 34 had 3.45 times the yearly odds of enrollment at ages 25 to 34, and membership by 43 increases the yearly odds of enrollment in the late age group by .926. Occupation in the first reported job is measured on the Treiman ISEI scale, which ranges from 0 to 90. Respondents who report never having had a job (n=35) were dropped, and the scale was recoded into 4 categories according to quartiles. An increase in one quartile of occupational status of the first job held was highly significant for early period college entrance. Respondents in the highest quartile had 5.61 times the odds of enrollment than those in the lowest occupational quartile.
Changing from the public to the private sector is well-known to be related to increased returns to education, especially for those who changed sectors later in the reform period (Wu and Xie 2003). Job sector here is measured differently, dividing jobs into 11 sectors. Intuitively, a desire to change sector might be a reason to acquire higher education, or higher education might expose a person to the knowledge and contacts necessary to make a switch. Changing job sectors was not significantly associated with college enrollment in the middle period and highly significant in the later period. Logically, changing sectors would have no effect for those who obtained their degree before they had a chance to work in two different sectors.
Respondents were asked a 14 question word-similarity test, including "How are a king and a president similar?" Responses were graded by the interviewer on variable scales, leading to a 31 point scale which is significantly correlated with a wide range of variables, but not with age. A ten-point increase in this verbal intelligence measure increases the yearly odds of enrollment by .73. Interestingly, the significance of the association between verbal acuity and enrollment is not strong for the latest enrollment group, and seems to have a large negative effect on the chances of enrolling even though the quiz score has only a .15 correlation with age.
Model 2 estimates the hazards of enrollment in higher education by 25, by 34, and by 43 when controlling for family and background-related variables. Birth year is highly significant for the youngest enrollees and significant for the oldest enrollees, likely due to the rapidly expanding education system for the youngest cohorts and the send-down experience for the older students. Male gender is included as a control and is not significant for this model.
As expected, ever having been sent-down to a rural area has a non-significant positive effect on the earliest students (increasing the odds by 1.56 times), who either were sent down after graduation or returned to the city by enrolling in school, and a negative effect on the second and third age groups. The yearly odds of enrolling decline with age for those sent-down, decreasing them by 2.13 and 3.31 times in the middle and late terms. These mixed and sometimes positive effects of an otherwise traumatic life experience are discussed in other research (Xie, Jiang, and Greenwell 2006, Zhou and Hou 1999, Deng and Treiman 1997).
Father's occupation at respondents' age 16 was based on the ISCO occupational scale. The data is missing for 47.5% of respondents, whose fathers were unemployed or deceased when the respondent was 16, who did not know, or were not asked their fathers' occupations because they were coded as elders in the matched-pair design of the SURFL data. Missing data is dropped, values 1-200 are coded as 5, 201-400 as 4, 401-600 as 3, 601-800 as 2, and 801-998 as 1. Lower occupation codes represent higher-status occupations, so a positive coefficient of fathers' occupation indicates that respondents whose fathers had higher-status jobs were more likely to enroll in higher education. As expected, the effect of fathers' occupation becomes less significant with age while the size of effects remains similar: the odds of enrollment increase by 1.23 times in the early and late periods and 1.37 in the middle period. The relationships of fathers' education and mothers' education or occupation with respondents' education were not strong, likely a result of the rapidly expanding education system (not shown).
Marriage also shows a differing effect across the life-course. Of the ever-married male and female respondents who met the educational requirements to be included in our sample, 61% and 32% were married by age 25, and 98% and 92% by age 34. Given that 75% of the sample who had one or more children had had a birth within 3 years of marrying, it seems that respondents in the 25-34 age group often have a small child at home. It is not surprising, then, that marriage by age 34 has a highly significant, negative effect on enrollment between ages 25-34, decreasing the yearly log-odds by 5.14 times. For respondents who are unlikely to have married yet or are less likely to have small children, marriage has no statistically significant effect. The somewhat negative coefficient of marriage in the first period, and positive effect of marriage in the older category are intuitive, as lower age at marriage likely indicates that the respondent did not expect to enroll and non-marriage in a society with nearly universal marriage likely is correlated with some negative unobserved features also associated with enrollment. An interaction term of female gender and marriage was not significant (not shown), however, which could suggest that the effect of marriage is the same for men and women, or could be an area for more careful future investigation.
As many as 40% of university and 50% of junior college graduates in China graduated after age 25, yet stratification researchers have rarely observed this striking fact. Indeed, education in China cannot be assumed to be continuous, as variation at every level is substantial. While delayed and adult education are often associated with disruptions due to the Cultural Revolution, cohorts too young or old to have missed pre-college education have also experienced substantial levels of higher education at non-normatively late ages. Indeed, the widespread irregularities in educational trajectories among the urban Chinese labor force provide an excellent opportunity for study of the causes and effects of educational timing.
Timing of college enrollment is associated with a number of variables in ways that vary across individuals' employment life-courses, including occupation of first job, party membership, verbal intelligence at time of test, birth cohort, sent-down experience, father's occupation, and marriage. Income returns to various types of higher education and according to timing are likely to differ, yet returns to education have not been estimated separately for early and late graduates. Results of the hazard analysis show that marriage deters yearly odds of enrollment between ages 25 and 34, while party membership by 34 is associated with higher enrollment odds in that period and after.
Unfortunately, little data has been collected to shed light on issues related to higher education in China, even though provision of higher education has been increasing at an almost exponential rate in the last few years. Survey researchers should pay closer attention to the timing and diverse types of higher educational experiences available in China today. Survey instruments could be designed to inquire about the start and stop dates at each education level, the name and type of school, the amount of time spent on coursework vs. employment, tuition and other financing, as well as party and work unit sponsorship of individuals. More research is needed on the variety of schooling available, as well as entrance and evaluation criteria of schools present and past. Little is known about how employers evaluate job applicants' educational credentials, or how income returns to education are related to quality and timing of education. Problems of small sample size for well-educated individuals in nationally or locally representative surveys could be ameliorated by over-sampling professionals or those with degrees.

Scholars share a common argument that engineering is the most male dominated of all professions (McIlwee and Robinson 1992). Although it grew from 46 in 1973 to 696 in 1995 (Long 2001), the number of women with Ph.D. is smallest in engineering compared to law, medicine and most of the natural sciences. This has been explained in many ways surrounding one central argument: the equation between masculinity and the whole engineering knowledge and practical structure and process. The analyses of the "masculinist bases of engineering" by Hacker (1979) shifted the study focus to the interlocks between patriarchy and technology resulting in creating and maintaining inequality and oppression. This makes the graduate engineering profession a symbol of masculinity (Cockburn 1984). Many scholars argued that the masculine values currently synonymous with technology could be replaced in favor of a new value system whose application would be controlled by women through women-centered leaning strategies (Rothschild 1983; Zimmerman 1983). The optimistic position focusing on the potential of women to take hold of engineering have not come true.
Whether and how the gendering of the engineering profession is being perpetuated? Much research emphasized that the biggest obstacles facing women are not about their knowledge and skills but of their adjustment to the masculinity of engineering culture (Hacker 1990; McIlwee and Robinson 1992, Dryburgh 1999; Seymour 1999). They concluded that women should exhibit characteristics of their chosen profession and be more masculine than their counterparts in sex-typical occupations as the ways of accommodation. However, the evidences of much study on other professions, such as law and medicine, directly counter this prediction: professional women are unreservedly feminine.
Secondly, there have been very few studies on women' lived experiences and their strategies to manage femininity and masculinity in engineering. Despite feminist criticism of engineering, many empirical studies indicated that most women were not bitter about their experiences in engineering (Trescott 1987). So what draws these women to and keeps them in engineering?
Meanwhile, the ethnical issues have not been noticed. The increases of the percent of engineering Ph.D. among non-white groups are almost entirely for Asian Americans (Long 2000). Xie (2003) argued that immigrant women increase women's representation in many areas. In a sense, Asian women are overrepresented among minorities in engineering, which makes great effects on their professionalization experiences.
Therefore, I chose to center the analysis on the professionalization of women coming from Mainland China in engineering school and intend to provide insight into their early socialization into the engineering culture.
From the interviews and observations, it is revealed that Chinese women are struggling to be professional engineering as well as professional feminine. So the questions are: How do they define and construct professional engineering and femininity? What motivate them to make these efforts? How far our female engineering graduates share feminist analyses? Do they feel any need to transform their profession and its practices? In stead of regarding femininity as a homogeneous category and exploring how women diminish or prevent their femininity to fit in engineering, I examine what room there is for variations in the construction of femininity in engineering and for negotiating the meaning of femininity. I argue that particular ethnic context and engineering graduate culture shape how women "engage, respond to, and resist dominant cultural images" (Martin 2006: 4) of femininity and how women do another femininity.
The professionalization process entails learning the appropriate theory and code of ethics, associating with the professional regulating body, and adjusting to or internalizing the values, norms and symbols of the professional culture (Greenwood 1966). Graduate school is regarded as crucial for starting engineering career because the failure at this stage effectively closes the door to professional engineering careers and later career trajectory changes is more difficult the longer it is delayed (Evette 1996). By this way, the engineering students leant to take on the identity of the professional, thus gaining the authority and legitimacy granted symbolically by the engineering regulating body and granted generally by the public. In the process, they have to learn what engineers actually do.
Hacker (1981) described the culture of engineering as a professional ideology which is based on a mind/body dualism which identifies rationality with men and emotion with women. It stresses masculine over feminine traits. There is little feeling of overt personal discrimination at an individual level (Carter & Kirkup 1990). McIlwee and Robinson (1992) pointed out the existence of a particular culture of engineering in the university. Compared to other professions, the differences between the university and the workplace are more extreme in engineering. For engineering graduates, the standards applied to success are mainly academic (McIlwee and Robinson 1992) and less open to bias than the standards applied to the workplace where discriminations are reported much more. The culture is least dominated by the interests of organization and is quite compatible with the math and science capacities of women. However, both of them are characteristic of valorizes individualistic, competitive and specialized approaches (Selby 1999).
Empirical studies identified engineering culture as hardworking profession and tightly knit community. So the challenges to women are to learn to project confidence in their abilities to adapt to high working pressure and show solidarity with others in their profession.
Presuming the engineering as possessing an unique masculine group culture (Greed 1991), the professionalziation is argued to be a process of women's accommodation to masculinity (Meadow 1989) and the difficulties and pains women have sustained became the focus in this area (McIlwee & Robinson 1992; Dryburgh 1999). A review of even the most recent literature suggests that knowing how to conform to the masculine professional culture and learn to perform and enact masculine norms of attitude and interaction is critical issue to women (...). This literature explored the masculine characteristics of engineering (...). It also examined the effects of gendered socialization on women's general orientations and attitudes toward professional success (...). The important factors involving in this process include family, especially mother's occupational status, school, career mentoring and particular events. Next, it noted the production of cultural messages which define engineering as a male field and contribute to the sense of discomfort engineering women feel (...). The literature emphasizing on basic and stable gender traits cannot explain sufficiently the situations of women in engineering nor why the numbers of engineering women had increased dramatically before 1990 and then remained on a stable level (...).
The different-sameness dilemma is also at the center of studies on law and medicine profession and organization (...). The former placed strong emphasis on how women are forced to be masculine in order to survive uncivil masculine culture of legal systems (...). The latter focused on the stratification and isolation of professional practices between men and women (...).
The discussions on whether professional women are or should be masculine or feminine understood gender as an attribute and have "led to the construction of unilateral categories which suppress differences between men and between women" (Kvande 1999:306). Secondly, they returned to gender socialization and psychoanalytical development as the primary determinant of women's professional status even though there is no links between childhood experiences and engineering students' current values, such as gender-assigned tasks and behaviors in childhood and attitudes toward characteristics considered womanly. Thirdly, they conflated "femininity" with "women" and take the conception of femininity for granted which only confirms the stereotypes of femininity. Those analyses did not address the size or prevalence of gender differences; this information was essential but well covered in the literature. In a word, the criteria of masculinity and femininity themselves have not be clarified.
Instead, I follow West and Zimmerman's (1987) conception of "doing gender" or Fenstermaker's (1985) application of gender as situated accomplishments. Here, gender is done in interactions which "is not always to live up to normative conceptions of femininity or masculinity; it is to engage in behavior at the risk of assessment" (Moloney & Fenstermaker 2002). For example, Kvande's (1999) research applied a relational understand of gender to illustrated the diversity in female engineers' construction of femininities.
Kvande's (1999) approach is promising but limited. Firstly, she ascribed the variation among femininities to the range of women's personality and individual choices. Her analyses is fixated on the reifications of femininities as discrete variables rather than concerning them as active social processes in the reciprocal relations between social structure and individuals. Secondly, she weighed different femininities equally and did not notice the power relations between them. In other words, she did not explain why majority of professional women did the same choice despite other possibilities. Thirdly, she emphasized gender as adaptable and mutable at the cost of affirming the natural class differences.
On the other hand, the analyses of femininity are grounded in Butler's notion of perfomativity. Butler (1993) distinguished perfomativity from performance in theatrical or dramaturgical terms. She argued that performativity "consists of a reiteration of norms which precede, constrain and exceed the performer an in that sense cannot be taken as the fabrication of the performer's 'will' or 'choice' "
This article is a study of variations in the construction of femininity. The focus is on the heterogeneity of "femininity" category instead of on differences between women and men or on the relations between the assumed different qualities and values of women and men. Then I turn to the area of masculinity and femininity studies.
This area is based on the work of masculinity scholars such as Connell (1987, 1995), especially the concept of hegemonic power which emphasizes the historical situations in which gender relations are established. Further, Chen (1999) claims that "In discussions of gender, hegemony is associated with the taken-for-granted conceptions about the nature of men and women, of masculinity and femininity" (586) and it is about one type of masculinity establishing and preserving ascendancy over others. Meanwhile Connell argues there is no hegemonic femininity, only an emphasized one.
Yet, just such an application is useful for understanding the production of a variety of feminine appearance routines. Scholars on profession shared the common argument that "femininity has more to do with a particular state of being than with actually doing anything" (Williams 1978: 78). Women do not face the pressure to prove their feminine identity. As a result, the "difference-sameness" debate is about whether and how women struggle to protect their femininity from masculinity.
Martin (2006) provided a useful framework of "hegemonic femininity" as a resolution. She criticized that Connell ignored the power relationships between women where race and class are unequal. She argued that power is just as frequently institutionalized in these relationships among women as they are among men and certain forms of femininity have become institutionalized as more worthy, complete, and superior forms. Those who take up a position of "hegemonic femininity" are not just coerced into this conception of femininity, but they also consent to it. It is actively taken up from within (Chen 1999). From within, it is also shaped and molded. It therefore has a hegemonic power over other femininities and has ascendancy over them in the social order.
Martin (2006) claimed it's useful to claim the existence of a hegemonic femininity and perhaps of a plurality of subordinate, marginalized, complicit femininities. The literature on femininity and engineering has no recognition of these complexities. It did not acknowledge the many ways women engage hegemonic femininity, nor the variety of femininities that are produced by such an engagement.
My interest is not just in knowing how femininity is done in variety, but how "it is done systematically and with social consequence" (Fenstermaker & West 2002). In other words, how gendered practices and interpretations contribute to the reproduction of the particular femininity complying to and accommodating women's subordination to masculinity of engineering structure. On the other hand, class, ethnicity and gender are connected with one another as activities and accomplishments; they derive their particular meanings through everyday social interactions located in particular engineering culture. In other words, I try to understand accomplishment of femininities combined with ethnicity and class as "outcomes of and rationales for rendering social inequality legitimate"(...).
I have been conducting 14 in-depth interviews at one American university engineering school3. The interviewees were female graduates students who graduated from universities in People's Republic of China. Given the focus of the research, most of the interview participants were women; however, many other men were involved in the informal activities under observation. All of them were under 30-years-old and most were single. All female interviewees but one came from middle-class families. The class backgrounds of male interviewees were more multiple. In addition, participant observations took place in the engineering offices, labs and informal parties.
An effort will be made to include students from all levels of the graduate program and main ethnic groups. The observation will continue in every very public settings where a variety of students could be observed in both social (cafeteria) and academic (classes, lectures) contexts.
The engineering school I studied is characteristic of the status between manufacturing-related orientation and fundamental academic orientation. Time and structure of engineering work varies according to specific areas and how the advisors organize it. For medical engineering, the comparatively long-term nature of product development means that daily deadlines are the exception, not the norm. In many processes, success does not depend primarily on the basis of hours put in, but on the care and creativity with which the work is done and the results recorded. This is in sharp contrast to other work, such as computer engineering especially software design. For the latter, more hours are translated to more code and directly equated hours with productivity. Also, product development cycles in computer engineering tend to be much shorter, which changes the day-to-day pressures on female students as well as professors.
The professionalization process can be understood as a career, marked by rites of passage, symbols, and rituals indicating progression and culminating in a transformed identity (Trice 1993). Haas and Shaffir (1991) describe this progression as one that includes
This career model, based on Goffman's (1959) analysis of self-presentation, works well to explain the "work hard" culture of engineering. It is a ritual ordeal that requires the student to demonstrate confidence in the face of strenuous challenge, anxiety, and self-doubt. Through this process, the engineering student eventually internalizes the professional persona of confidence. Many studies pointed out, the two crucial factors of engineering culture-work hard and confidence-construct the basic contradiction for engineering women (...).
Previous studies noted that the self-confidence of the engineering women is strongly tied to their success outside of work (...). By placing emphasis on their hard working, engineering women may be undermining a deeply-held cultural premise; this could easily have negative consequences for their sense of self -- it is especially true for single female graduate who place more emphasis on work than on other aspects of their lives but are not trying to combine work with family in reality because working hard is connected with masculinity opposed to femininity (...). My study reveals the opposite results because of the intersection between ethnicity and gender as well as the women's various concern with femininity.
For all female my interviewees, the most salient thing they have to manage is not their gender but ethnicity. When I asked them whether they felt comfortable to study and work in engineering, almost all of them offered answer similar with this:
For Chinese women, the challenge is not working with men, but working with men from different countries and areas. The proportions of different ethnical groups in engineering school are different depending on the specific areas. Asian graduates make the main graduate body. Mainland Chinese graduates, especially female graduates, concentrate in doctoral program. For example, in computer science, Chinese women constitute the main body of female doctoral students and Indian women constitute the main body of female master students. The only exception is environment engineering where the proportion of female graduates is the highest and that of Chinese graduates is the lowest. Interviewees always mentioned ethnicity automatically when they talked about their working environment and their own position. To be contrary, they hardly notice the existence of "gender":
Contrary to previous studies, Chinese female graduates' ambivalence to developing technical expertise is lower. Meanwhile, they are not learning to adapt to the work hard culture of engineering and to the predominance of males in their classes and offices. Rather, they integrate work into their ethnical and feminine identities to increase their confidence.
In observations, Chinese women kept on referring to males in other ethnical groups. For example, women talked about how long their Indian male officemates stay in the lab which constitutes their motivation to work harder. Or, a girl said that she was very proud that she as the only Chinese student in her area stayed in the lab alone on weekend. Or, they often laughed at American white men's laziness and arrogance. However, they never compared themselves with other Chinese guys while they also noticed how hard their Chinese male colleagues worked.
On the other hand, female interviewees confirmed the relationship between the work and "performative" of femininity. All of them said they do not have time to pay much attention to their appearance which they believe causes persons' stereotype images about engineering women.
However, instead of acknowledging that they were not feminine, women emphasized that they were morally "pure" -- which is more important feminine criteria compared to attractive appearance. They differentiate themselves from women outside engineering. In interviews, most female interviewees automatically referred to other Chinese women in social science and humanities when. They mentioned that "those humanities women" always stayed in the dormitory, got up very late and did not need to work. They also talked that "those women" often hung around and resorted to places for relaxation or recreation and they were lack of those experience so they were behind the times but traditional and good. They said that -- compared to those women -- they had too much work to pay attention to appearance. However, they insist that they have the capacity to dress well.
All female graduates emphasize the significance of work. Firstly, they distance themselves from other ethnical groups, mark their intelligence privilege as a "Chinese" and eliminate the contradiction between femininity and work. Secondly, they admitted that engineering work, because of its time and organization, limits their time to display their femininity. But through separating hard working from the feminine stereotypes represented by women in humanities and social science, they reject the significance of appearance for doing femininity. On the other hand, they emphasize hard working and staying at labs all the time protected their femininity from contaminated.
In other words, they defined engineering femininity as "simple, clean and traditional but intelligent" the core of which is "purity" (DanChun). Therefore, "working hard" is constructed as a part of femininity for Chinese engineering graduates here.
The past three decades watched that the engineering work has been increasingly desk-based or visual-display-unit-based though the stereotypes of engineering involving a close relationship with heavy machine are partly true.
Some of my interviewees do have troubles with machines and hand tools depending on their particular areas. They manage the manual difficulties in two ways. Part of my female interviewees distinguished themselves from "women" as a general and collective category. They said they themselves as individuals had no problem with these manual issues. Meanwhile, they said engineering was not fit for "women" and they would not encourage other women to pursue engineering career.
Meanwhile, part of my interviewees linked the unpleasant manual part of engineering work with working-class while they also said they got along with manual labor well. They joked with machines and hand tools. However, they described that their lab environment are similar with factories and one of them talked about her problems in working with workers during intern practice.
On the other hand, another change in the engineering career paths is engineers' moving into management. Different from previous studies (Carter & Kirkup 1990; Mattis & Allyn 1999), only one of my female interviewees ever considered going into a managerial position though all of them expressed a desire of supporting or pushing engineering men into it. To be contrary, mechanism for male interviewee's finding new development opportunities varies from formal to informal and from systematic to random. Women's low engagement in the queue for management training makes their routes for progression into management positions very hard.
Chinese women link management with "complex and dirty" personnel management which is not "pure" feminine at all. All claimed that they were not concerned with money so much. All but one said they prefer to deal with machine. They ranked technical expertise as more valuable and morally "pure" than knowledge of society. They described social sciences in womanly terms: soft, inaccurate, lacking in rigor, unpredictable, and amorphous. However, very few felt that their male peers were inadequate because they lacked knowledge of social systems. And they looked proud of their own inadequacy and interpreted it as traditional and conservative -- in other words, pure -- when they talked about femininities of other women outside engineering. For example, one interviewee focused on social abilities and linked them with "open party girls" when she talked about why humanities women were more popular on campus.
One of the direct results for the indifferent towards management is Chinese women do not inclined to set up their network outside the Chinese community as their Chinese male colleagues. Many of them identified it as the main difference between Chinese engineering men and women. In a sense, these engineering girls are working under a comparatively isolating condition.
Dryburg (1999) talked about that engineering culture is defined by contrasting engineers with the "Artsy" which is a derogatory term referring to male students from the Arts and Social Sciences departments. The "Artsy" is impotent, cannot get a woman or job and cannot even do what he purports to do best.
Chinese engineering women shared this notion of "Artsy" though they did not use this word. They insisted that engineering guys are the best candidates for husbands. In this sense, Chinese men became the sexual objects of women. Meanwhile, they accepted themselves to be regarded as sexual objects for men. It is also linked with their commitment to the Chinese groups.
Further, women extend the notion of "Artsy" and applied it to women outside engineering. They acknowledged that those women are feminine but diminished those femininities' values: Those women are sexually attractive but they cannot get job so as to be dependent on men; those women are good in managing appearance which are trivial.
The other problem is about women's interaction with men at labs. Basically, women intended to perform "tender, quiet, patient" and sometimes "dependent" even though they themselves were strong and decisive. Different women perform differently. On the other hand, Chinese men evaluated these women's "accomplishment of femininity" in different ways. For example, they were much more friendly to those "feminine" women and offer more help.
Almost all interviewees said that the most important thing about femininity is how to perform femininity in relation to Chinese men. They refused the feminine criteria scholars used in judgment, such as personality and appearance.
All interviewees refused to take the American femininity or masculinity into account. On the one hand, they thought their American female colleagues and faculties were too masculine. In a sense, they equated "feminism" with "western". Many of them claimed that they did not like feminism and thought Americans were too sensitive to gender issues. On the other hand, they thought American women outside engineering and science were too open to be morally pure.
The same characteristics, which are treated as masculine in previous literature, can be interpreted as feminine by Chinese women. Chinese ethnicity and engineering factors are the core of femininity for Chinese engineering female graduates. On the other hand, women choose different reference groups to construct their femininity though it is always built in relations. This femininity is characteristic of morally "purity". It is contrary to Karin's study, appearance is not an important feminine criteria for Chinese engineering women.
Femininity is something need to be done. Women have different criteria to construct it. The problem is not about the content of femininity or masculinity but about their significance and positions in the identity construction.
I have tried to explore femininity in relationship to other axes of identity by exploring what utility come from thinking through gender as a performance and as performative and by exploring how the various gestures of femininity never exist outside of ethnicity and moral meanings. Gender is largely missing as a category of identity in the study, making it difficult to have a cultural or political identity.

